In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth . And the earth was without form , and void ; and darkness was upon the face of the deep : And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said , Let there be light : and there was light .
And God saw the light , that it was good : and God divided the light from the darkness .
And God called the light Day , and the darkness he called Night . And the evening and the morning were the first day . 
And God said , Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters , and let it divide the waters from the waters .
And God made the firmament , and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament : and it was so .
And God called the firmament Heaven . And the evening and the morning were the second day .
And God said , Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place , and let the dry land appear : and it was so .
And God called the dry land Earth ; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas : and God saw that it was good .
And God said , Let the earth bring forth grass , the herb yielding seed , and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind , whose seed is in itself , upon the earth : and it was so .
And the earth brought forth grass , and herb yielding seed after his kind , and the tree yielding fruit , whose seed was in itself , after his kind : and God saw that it was good .
And the evening and the morning were the third day .
And God said , Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night ; and let them be for signs , and for seasons , and for days , and years :
And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth : and it was so .
And God made two great lights ; the greater light to rule the day , and the lesser light to rule the night : he made the stars also .
And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth ,
and to rule over the day and over the night , and to divide the light from the darkness : and God saw that it was good .
And the evening and the morning were the fourth day .
And God said , Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that has life , and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven .
And God created great whales , and every living creature that move , which the waters brought forth abundantly , after their kind , and every winged fowl after his kind : and God saw that it was good .
And God blessed them , saying , Be fruitful , and multiply , and fill the waters in the seas , and let fowl multiply in the earth .
And the evening and the morning were the fifth day .
And God said , Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind , cattle , and creeping thing , and beast of the earth after his kind : and it was so .
And God made the beast of the earth after his kind , and cattle after their kind , and every thing that creeps upon the earth after his kind : and God saw that it was good .
And God said , Let us make man in our image , after our likeness : and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea , and over the fowl of the air , and over the cattle , and over all the earth , and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth .
So God created man in his own image , in the image of God he created him ; male and female created he them .
And God blessed them , and God said unto them , Be fruitful , and multiply , and replenish the earth , and subdue it : and have dominion over the fish of the sea , and over the fowl of the air , and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth .
And God said , Behold , I have given you every herb bearing seed , which is upon the face of all the earth , and every tree , in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed ; to you it shall be for food .
And to every beast of the earth , and to every fowl of the air , and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth , wherein there is life , I have given every green herb for meat  and it was so .
And God saw every thing that he had made , and , behold , it was very good . And the evening and the morning were the sixth day .
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished , and all the host of them .
And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made ; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made .
And God blessed the seventh day , and sanctified it : because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made .
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created , in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens .
And every plant of the field before it was in the earth , and every herb of the field before it grew : for the LORD God had not caused it to rain upon the earth , and there was not a man to till the ground .
But there went up a mist from the earth , and watered the whole face of the ground .
And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground , and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life ; and man became a living soul .
And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden ; and there he put the man whom he had formed .
And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight , and good for food ; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden , and the tree of knowledge of good and evil .
And a river went out of Eden to water the garden ; and from thence it was parted , and became into four heads .
The name of the first is Pison : that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah , where there is gold ;
And the gold of that land is good : there is bdellium and the onyx stone .
And the name of the second river is Gihon : the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia .
And the name of the third river is Hiddekel : that is it which goeth toward the east of Assyria . And the fourth river is Euphrates .
And the LORD God took the man , and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it .
And the LORD God commanded the man , saying , Of every tree of the garden you maye freely eat :
But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil , thou shalt not eat of it : for in the day that you eatest thereof thou shall surely die .
And the LORD God said , it is not good that the man should be alone ; I will make him an help mate for him .
And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field , and every fowl of the air ; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them : and whatsoever Adam called every living creature , that was the name thereof .
And Adam gave names to all cattle , and to the fowl of the air , and to every beast of the field ; but for Adam there was not found an help mate for him .
And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam , and he slept : and he took one of his ribs , and closed up the flesh instead thereof ;
And the rib , which the LORD God had taken from man , made him a woman , and brought her unto the man .
And Adam said , this is now bone of my bones , and flesh of my flesh : she shall be called Woman , because she was taken out of Man .
Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother , and shall cleave unto his wife : and they shall be one flesh .
And they were both naked , the man and his wife , and were not ashamed .
Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the LORD God had made . And he said unto the woman , Yes , has God said , You shall not eat of every tree of the garden ?
And the woman said unto the serpent , We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden :
But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden , God hath said , You shall not eat of it , neither shall you touch it , lest you die .
And the serpent said unto the woman , You shall not surely die :
For God do know that in the day you eat thereof , then your eyes shall be opened , and you shall be as gods , knowing good and evil .
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food , and that it was pleasant to the eyes , and a tree to be desired to make one wise , she took of the fruit thereof , and did eat , and gave also unto her husband with her ; and he did eat .
And the eyes of them both were opened , and they knew that they were naked ; and they sewed fig leaves together , and made themselves aprons .
And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day : and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of the garden .
And the LORD God called unto Adam , and said unto him , Where are you ?
And he said , I heard your voice in the garden , and I was afraid , because I was naked ; and I hid myself .
And he said , Who told you that you was naked ? Has you eaten of the tree , whereof I commanded you that you should not eat ?
And the man said , The woman whom you gave to be with me , she gave me of the tree , and I did eat .
And the LORD God said unto the woman , What is this that you have done ? And the woman said , The serpent beguiled me , and I did eat .
And the LORD God said unto the serpent , Because veou have done this, you are cursed above all cattle , and above every beast of the field ; upon your belly shall you go , and dust shall you eat all the days of thy life :
And I will put enmity between you and the woman , and between your seed and her seed ; it shall bruise your head , and you shall bruise his heel .
Unto the woman he said , I will greatly multiply your sorrow and your conception ; in sorrow you shall bring forth children ; and your desire shall be to your husband , and he shall rule over you .
And unto Adam he said , Because you have hearkened unto the voice of your wife , and has eaten of the tree , of which I commanded you , saying , You shall not eat of it : cursed is the ground for your sake ; in sorrow shall you eat of it all the days of your life ;
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to you ; and you shall eat the herb of the field ;
In the sweat of your face you shall eat bread , till you return unto the ground ; for out of it you were taken : for dust you are , and unto dust you shall return .
And Adam called his wife's name Eve ; because she was the mother of all living .
Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of skins , and clothed them .
And the LORD God said , Behold , the man has become as one of us , to know good and evil : and now , lest he put forth his hand , and take also of the tree of life , and eat , and live for ever :
Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden , to till the ground from where he was taken .
So he drove out the man ; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims , and a flaming sword which turned every way , to keep the way of the tree of life . 
Adam made love to his wife Eve , and she became pregnant and gave birth to Cain .She said , “ With the help of the Lord I have brought forth a man . ” 
Later she gave birth to his brother Abel . Now Abel kept flocks , and Cain worked the soil .
In the course of time Cain brought some of the fruits of the soil as an offering to the Lord .
And Abel also brought an offering—fat portions from some of the firstborn of his flock . The Lord looked with favor on Abel and his offering ,   
but on Cain and his offering he did not look with favor . So Cain was very angry , and his face was downcast .
Then the Lord said to Cain , “ Why are you angry ? Why is your face downcast ?
If you do what is right, will you not be accepted ? But if you do not do what is right , sin is crouching at your door ; it desires to have you , but you must rule over it . ”
Now Cain said to his brother Abel , “ Let us go out to the field . ” While they were in the field , Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him .
Then the Lord said to Cain , “ Where is your brother Abel ? ” “ I don’t know , ” he replied . “ Am I my brother’s keeper ? ”
The Lord said , “ What have you done? Listen ! Your brother’s blood cries out to me from the ground . 
Now you are under a curse and driven from the ground , which opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from your hand .
When you work the ground , it will no longer yield its crops for you . You will be a restless wanderer on the earth . ”
Cain said to the Lord , “ My punishment is more than I can bear .
Today you are driving me from the land , and I will be hidden from your presence ; I will be a restless wanderer on the earth , and whoever finds me will kill me . ”
But the Lord said to him , “ Not so ; anyone who kills Cain will suffer vengeance seven times over . ” Then the Lord put a mark on Cain so that no one who found him would kill him . 
So Cain went out from the Lord’s presence and lived in the land of Nod , east of Eden .
Cain made love to his wife , and she became pregnant and gave birth to Enoch . Cain was then building a city , and he named it after his son Enoch .
To Enoch was born Irad , and Irad was the father of Mehujael , and Mehujael was the father of Methushael , and Methushael was the father of Lamech .
Lamech married two women , one named Adah and the other Zillah .
Adah gave birth to Jabal ; he was the father of those who live in tents and raise livestock .
His brother’s name was Jubal ; he was the father of all who play stringed instruments and pipes . 
Zillah also had a son , Tubal - Cain , who forged all kinds of tools out of bronze and iron . Tubal - Cain’s sister was Naamah .
Lamech said to his wives , “ Adah and Zillah , listen to me ; wives of Lamech , hear my words . I have killed a man for wounding me , a young man for injuring me .
If Cain is avenged seven times , then Lamech seventy-seven times . ”
Adam made love to his wife again , and she gave birth to a son and named him Seth , saying , “ God has granted me another child in place of Abel , since Cain killed him . ” 
Seth also had a son , and he named him Enosh . At that time people began to call on the name of the Lord .
This is the written account of Adam’s family line . When God created mankind , he made them in the likeness of God .
He created them male and female and blessed them.  And he named them “ Mankind ” when they were created .
When Adam had lived 130 years , he had a son in his own likeness , in his own image ; and he named him Seth . 
After Seth was born , Adam lived 800 years and had other sons and daughters . 
Altogether , Adam lived a total of 930 years , and then he died .
When Seth had lived 105 years , he became the father of Enosh . 
After he became the father of Enosh , Seth lived 807 years and had other sons and daughters . 
Altogether , Seth lived a total of 912 years , and then he died .
When Enosh had lived 90 years , he became the father of Kenan . 
After he became the father of Kenan , Enosh lived 815 years and had other sons and daughters .
ltogether , Enosh lived a total of 905 years , and then he died .
When Kenan had lived 70 years , he became the father of Mahalalel .
After he became the father of Mahalalel , Kenan lived 840 years and had other sons and daughters .
Altogether , Kenan lived a total of 910 years , and then he died .
When Mahalalel had lived 65 years , he became the father of Jared .
After he became the father of Jared , Mahalalel lived 830 years and had other sons and daughters .
Altogether , Mahalalel lived a total of 895 years , and then he died .
When Jared had lived 162 years , he became the father of Enoch .
After he became the father of Enoch , Jared lived 800 years and had other sons and daughters .
Altogether , Jared lived a total of 962 years , and then he died .
When Enoch had lived 65 years , he became the father of Methuselah .
After he became the father of Methuselah , Enoch walked faithfully with God 300 years and had other sons and daughters .
Altogether , Enoch lived a total of 365 years .
Enoch walked faithfully with God ; then he was no more , because God took him away .
When Methuselah had lived 187 years , he became the father of Lamech .
After he became the father of Lamech , Methuselah lived 782 years and had other sons and daughters .
Altogether , Methuselah lived a total of 969 years , and then he died .
When Lamech had lived 182 years , he had a son .
He named him Noah and said , “ He will comfort us in the labor and painful toil of our hands caused by the ground the Lord has cursed . ”
After Noah was born , Lamech lived 595 years and had other sons and daughters . 
Altogether , Lamech lived a total of 777 years , and then he died .
After Noah was 500 years old, he became the father of Shem, Ham and Japheth.
When human beings began to increase in number on the earth and daughters were born to them ,
the sons of God saw that the daughters of humans were beautiful , and they married any of them they chose .
Then the Lord said , “ My Spirit will not contend with humans forever , for they are mortal ; their days will be a hundred and twenty years . ”
The Nephilim were on the earth in those days — and also afterward — when the sons of God went to the daughters of humans and had children by them . They were the heroes of old , men of renown .
The Lord saw how great the wickedness of the human race had become on the earth , and that every inclination of the thoughts of the human heart was only evil all the time .
The Lord regretted that he had made human beings on the earth , and his heart was deeply troubled .
So the Lord said , “ I will wipe from the face of the earth the human race I have created — and with them the animals , the birds and the creatures that move along the ground — for I regret that I have made them . ”
But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord .
This is the account of Noah and his family. Noah was a righteous man , blameless among the people of his time , and he walked faithfully with God .
Noah had three sons : Shem , Ham and Japheth .
Now the earth was corrupt in God’s sight and was full of violence .
God saw how corrupt the earth had become , for all the people on earth had corrupted their ways .
So God said to Noah , “ I am going to put an end to all people , for the earth is filled with violence because of them . I am surely going to destroy both them and the earth .
So make yourself an ark of cypress wood ; make rooms in it and coat it with pitch inside and out .
This is how you are to build it : The ark is to be three hundred cubits long , fifty cubits wide and thirty cubits high .
Make a roof for it , leaving below the roof an opening one cubit high all around . Put a door in the side of the ark and make lower , middle and upper decks .
I am going to bring floodwaters on the earth to destroy all life under the heavens , every creature that has the breath of life in it . Everything on earth will perish .
But I will establish my covenant with you,  and you will enter the ark — you and your sons and your wife and your sons’ wives with you .
You are to bring into the ark two of all living creatures , male and female , to keep them alive with you .
Two of every kind of bird , of every kind of animal and of every kind of creature that moves along the ground will come to you to be kept alive .
You are to take every kind of food that is to be eaten and store it away as food for you and for them . ”
Noah did everything just as God commanded him .
The Lord then said to Noah , “ Go into the ark , you and your whole family , because I have found you righteous in this generation .
Take with you seven pairs of every kind of clean animal , a male and its mate , and one pair of every kind of unclean animal , a male and its mate ,
and also seven pairs of every kind of bird , male and female , to keep their various kinds alive throughout the earth .
Seven days from now I will send rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights , and I will wipe from the face of the earth every living creature I have made . ”
And Noah did all that the Lord commanded him .
Noah was six hundred years old when the floodwaters came on the earth .
And Noah and his sons and his wife and his sons’ wives entered the ark to escape the waters of the flood .
Pairs of clean and unclean animals , of birds and of all creatures that move along the ground ,
male and female , came to Noah and entered the ark , as God had commanded Noah .
And after the seven days the floodwaters came on the earth .
In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life , on the seventeenth day of the second month — on that day all the springs of the great deep burst forth , and the floodgates of the heavens were opened .
And rain fell on the earth forty days and forty nights .
On that very day Noah and his sons , Shem , Ham and Japheth , together with his wife and the wives of his three sons , entered the ark .
They had with them every wild animal according to its kind , all livestock according to their kinds , every creature that moves along the ground according to its kind and every bird according to its kind , everything with wings .
Pairs of all creatures that have the breath of life in them came to Noah and entered the ark .
The animals going in were male and female of every living thing , as God had commanded Noah . Then the Lord shut him in .
For forty days the flood kept coming on the earth , and as the waters increased they lifted the ark high above the earth .
The waters rose and increased greatly on the earth , and the ark floated on the surface of the water .
They rose greatly on the earth , and all the high mountains under the entire heavens were covered .
The waters rose and covered the mountains to a depth of more than fifteen cubits .
Every living thing that moved on land perished — birds , livestock , wild animals , all the creatures that swarm over the earth , and all mankind .
Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died .
Every living thing on the face of the earth was wiped out ; people and animals and the creatures that move along the ground and the birds were wiped from the earth . Only Noah was left , and those with him in the ark .
The waters flooded the earth for a hundred and fifty days .
But God remembered Noah and all the wild animals and the livestock that were with him in the ark , and he sent a wind over the earth , and the waters receded .
Now the springs of the deep and the floodgates of the heavens had been closed , and the rain had stopped falling from the sky .
The water receded steadily from the earth . At the end of the hundred and fifty days the water had gone down ,
and on the seventeenth day of the seventh month the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat .
The waters continued to recede until the tenth month , and on the first day of the tenth month the tops of the mountains became visible .
After forty days Noah opened a window he had made in the ark 
and sent out a raven, and it kept flying back and forth until the water had dried up from the earth .
Then he sent out a dove to see if the water had receded from the surface of the ground .
But the dove could find nowhere to perch because there was water over all the surface of the earth ; so it returned to Noah in the ark . He reached out his hand and took the dove and brought it back to himself in the ark .
He waited seven more days and again sent out the dove from the ark .
When the dove returned to him in the evening , there in its beak was a freshly plucked olive leaf ! Then Noah knew that the water had receded from the earth .
He waited seven more days and sent the dove out again , but this time it did not return to him .
By the first day of the first month of Noah’s six hundred and first year , the water had dried up from the earth . Noah then removed the covering from the ark and saw that the surface of the ground was dry .
By the twenty - seventh day of the second month the earth was completely dry .
Then God said to Noah ,
“ Come out of the ark , you and your wife and your sons and their wives .
Bring out every kind of living creature that is with you—the birds , the animals , and all the creatures that move along the ground — so they can multiply on the earth and be fruitful and increase in number on it . ”
So Noah came out , together with his sons and his wife and his sons’ wives .
All the animals and all the creatures that move along the ground and all the birds — everything that moves on land — came out of the ark , one kind after another .
Then Noah built an altar to the Lord and , taking some of all the clean animals and clean birds , he sacrificed burnt offerings on it .
The Lord smelled the pleasing aroma and said in his heart : “ Never again will I curse the ground because of humans , even though every inclination of the human heart is evil from childhood . And never again will I destroy all living creatures , as I have done .
As long as the earth endures , seedtime and harvest , cold and heat , summer and winter , day and night will never cease . ”
Then God blessed Noah and his sons , saying to them , “ Be fruitful and increase in number and fill the earth . 
The fear and dread of you will fall on all the beasts of the earth , and on all the birds in the sky , on every creature that moves along the ground , and on all the fish in the sea ; they are given into your hands .
Everything that lives and moves about will be food for you . Just as I gave you the green plants , I now give you everything .
But you must not eat meat that has its lifeblood still in it .
And for your lifeblood I will surely demand an accounting . I will demand an accounting from every animal . And from each human being , too , I will demand an accounting for the life of another human being .
Whoever sheds human blood , by humans shall their blood be shed ; for in the image of God has God made mankind .
"As for you , be fruitful and increase in number ; multiply on the earth and increase upon it . ”
Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him : 
“ I now establish my covenant with you and with your descendants after you ,
and with every living creature that was with you — the birds , the livestock and all the wild animals , all those that came out of the ark with you—every living creature on earth .
I establish my covenant with you : Never again will all life be destroyed by the waters of a flood ; never again will there be a flood to destroy the earth . ”
And God said , “ This is the sign of the covenant I am making between me and you and every living creature with you , a covenant for all generations to come : 
I have set my rainbow in the clouds , and it will be the sign of the covenant between me and the earth .
Whenever I bring clouds over the earth and the rainbow appears in the clouds , 
I will remember my covenant between me and you and all living creatures of every kind . Never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all life .
Whenever the rainbow appears in the clouds , I will see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and all living creatures of every kind on the earth . ”
So God said to Noah , “ This is the sign of the covenant I have established between me and all life on the earth . ”
The sons of Noah who came out of the ark were Shem , Ham and Japheth . ( Ham was the father of Canaan . )
These were the three sons of Noah , and from them came the people who were scattered over the whole earth .
Noah , a man of the soil , proceeded to plant a vineyard .
When he drank some of its wine , he became drunk and lay uncovered inside his tent . 
Ham , the father of Canaan , saw his father naked and told his two brothers outside . 
But Shem and Japheth took a garment and laid it across their shoulders ; then they walked in backward and covered their father’s naked body . Their faces were turned the other way so that they would not see their father naked .
When Noah awoke from his wine and found out what his youngest son had done to him , 
he said , “ Cursed be Canaan ! The lowest of slaves will he be to his brothers . ”
He also said , “ Praise be to the Lord , the God of Shem ! May Canaan be the slave of Shem .
May God extend Japheth’s territory ; may Japheth live in the tents of Shem , and may Canaan be the slave of Japheth . ”
After the flood Noah lived 350 years .
Noah lived a total of 950 years , and then he died .
Paul , a servant of Christ Jesus , called to be an apostle and set apart for the gospel of God — 
the gospel he promised beforehand through his prophets in the Holy Scriptures
regarding his Son , who as to his earthly life was a descendant of David , 
and who through the Spirit of holiness was appointed the Son of God in power by his resurrection from the dead : Jesus Christ our Lord . 
Through him we received grace and apostleship to call all the Gentiles to the obedience that comes from faith for his name’s sake . 
And you also are among those Gentiles who are called to belong to Jesus Christ .
To all in Rome who are loved by God and called to be his holy people : Grace and peace to you from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ .
First , I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you , because your faith is being reported all over the world .
God , whom I serve in my spirit in preaching the gospel of his Son , is my witness how constantly I remember you 
in my prayers at all times ; and I pray that now at last by God’s will the way may be opened for me to come to you .
I long to see you so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift to make you strong — 
that is , that you and I may be mutually encouraged by each other’s faith . 
I do not want you to be unaware , brothers and sisters , that I planned many times to come to you (but have been prevented from doing so until now) in order that I might have a harvest among you , just as I have had among the other Gentiles .
I am obligated both to Greeks and non-Greeks , both to the wise and the foolish .
That is why I am so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in Rome .
For I am not ashamed of the gospel , because it is the power of God that brings salvation to everyone who believes : first to the Jew , then to the Gentile .
For in the gospel the righteousness of God is revealed—a righteousness that is by faith from first to last , just as it is written : “ The righteous will live by faith . ”
The wrath of God is being revealed from heaven against all the godlessness and wickedness of people , who suppress the truth by their wickedness , 
since what may be known about God is plain to them , because God has made it plain to them .
For since the creation of the world God’s invisible qualities—his eternal power and divine nature—have been clearly seen , being understood from what has been made , so that people are without excuse .
For although they knew God , they neither glorified him as God nor gave thanks to him , but their thinking became futile and their foolish hearts were darkened .
Although they claimed to be wise , they became fools 
and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look like a mortal human being and birds and animals and reptiles .
Therefore God gave them over in the sinful desires of their hearts to sexual impurity for the degrading of their bodies with one another . 
They exchanged the truth about God for a lie , and worshiped and served created things rather than the Creator — who is forever praised . Amen .
Because of this , God gave them over to shameful lusts . Even their women exchanged natural sexual relations for unnatural ones . 
In the same way the men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed with lust for one another . Men committed shameful acts with other men , and received in themselves the due penalty for their error .
Furthermore , just as they did not think it worthwhile to retain the knowledge of God , so God gave them over to a depraved mind , so that they do what ought not to be done . 
They have become filled with every kind of wickedness , evil , greed and depravity . They are full of envy , murder , strife , deceit and malice . They are gossips , 
slanderers , God-haters , insolent , arrogant and boastful ; they invent ways of doing evil ; they disobey their parents ; 
they have no understanding , no fidelity , no love , no mercy .
Although they know God’s righteous decree that those who do such things deserve death , they not only continue to do these very things but also approve of those who practice them . 
You , therefore , have no excuse , you who pass judgment on someone else , for at whatever point you judge another , you are condemning yourself , because you who pass judgment do the same things . 
Now we know that God’s judgment against those who do such things is based on truth .
So when you , a mere human being , pass judgment on them and yet do the same things , do you think you will escape God’s judgment ?
Or do you show contempt for the riches of his kindness , forbearance and patience , not realizing that God’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance ?
But because of your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart , you are storing up wrath against yourself for the day of God’s wrath , when his righteous judgment will be revealed .
God “ will repay each person according to what they have done . ”
To those who by persistence in doing good seek glory , honor and immortality , he will give eternal life .
But for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow evil , there will be wrath and anger .
There will be trouble and distress for every human being who does evil : first for the Jew , then for the Gentile ; 
but glory , honor and peace for everyone who does good : first for the Jew , then for the Gentile . 
For God does not show favoritism .
All who sin apart from the law will also perish apart from the law , and all who sin under the law will be judged by the law .
For it is not those who hear the law who are righteous in God’s sight , but it is those who obey the law who will be declared righteous .
Indeed , when Gentiles , who do not have the law , do by nature things required by the law , they are a law for themselves , even though they do not have the law .
They show that the requirements of the law are written on their hearts , their consciences also bearing witness , and their thoughts sometimes accusing them and at other times even defending them .
This will take place on the day when God judges people’s secrets through Jesus Christ , as my gospel declares .
Now you,  if you call yourself a Jew ; if you rely on the law and boast in God ; 
if you know his will and approve of what is superior because you are instructed by the law ;
if you are convinced that you are a guide for the blind , a light for those who are in the dark , 
an instructor of the foolish , a teacher of little children , because you have in the law the embodiment of knowledge and truth .
you , then , who teach others , do you not teach yourself ? You who preach against stealing , do you steal ?
You who say that people should not commit adultery , do you commit adultery ? You who abhor idols , do you rob temples ?
You who boast in the law , do you dishonor God by breaking the law ? 
As it is written : “ God’s name is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you . ”
Circumcision has value if you observe the law , but if you break the law , you have become as though you had not been circumcised . 
So then , if those who are not circumcised keep the law’s requirements , will they not be regarded as though they were circumcised ?
The one who is not circumcised physically and yet obeys the law will condemn you who , even though you have the written code and circumcision , are a lawbreaker .
A person is not a Jew who is one only outwardly , nor is circumcision merely outward and physical .
No , a person is a Jew who is one inwardly ; and circumcision is circumcision of the heart , by the Spirit , not by the written code . Such a person’s praise is not from other people , but from God .
What advantage , then , is there in being a Jew , or what value is there in circumcision ? 
Much in every way ! First of all , the Jews have been entrusted with the very words of God .
What if some were unfaithful? Will their unfaithfulness nullify God’s faithfulness ? 
Not at all! Let God be true, and every human being a liar. As it is written :
“ So that you may be proved right when you speak and prevail when you judge . ”
But if our unrighteousness brings out God’s righteousness more clearly , what shall we say ? That God is unjust in bringing his wrath on us ? I am using a human argument .
Certainly not ! If that were so , how could God judge the world ? 
Someone might argue , “ If my falsehood enhances God’s truthfulness and so increases his glory , why am I still condemned as a sinner ? ” 
Why not say—as some slanderously claim that we say , “ Let us do evil that good may result ” ? Their condemnation is just !
What shall we conclude then ? Do we have any advantage ? Not at all ! For we have already made the charge that Jews and Gentiles alike are all under the power of sin . 
As it is written : “ There is no one righteous , not even one ;
there is no one who understands ; there is no one who seeks God .
All have turned away , they have together become worthless ; there is no one who does good , not even one . ”
“ Their throats are open graves ; their tongues practice deceit . ” “ The poison of vipers is on their lips . "
“ Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness . ”
“ Their feet are swift to shed blood ;
ruin and misery mark their ways , 
and the way of peace they do not know . ”
“ There is no fear of God before their eyes . ”
Now we know that whatever the law says , it says to those who are under the law , so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world held accountable to God .
Therefore no one will be declared righteous in God’s sight by the works of the law ; rather , through the law we become conscious of our sin .
But now apart from the law the righteousness of God has been made known , to which the Law and the Prophets testify .
This righteousness is given through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe . There is no difference between Jew and Gentile ,
for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God ,
and all are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by Christ Jesus .
God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement , through the shedding of his blood—to be received by faith . He did this to demonstrate his righteousness , because in his forbearance he had left the sins committed beforehand unpunished .
he did it to demonstrate his righteousness at the present time , so as to be just and the one who justifies those who have faith in Jesus .
Where , then , is boasting ? It is excluded . Because of what law ? The law that requires works ? No , because of the law that requires faith .
For we maintain that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law .
Or is God the God of Jews only ? Is he not the God of Gentiles too ? Yes , of Gentiles too ,
since there is only one God , who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through that same faith .
Do we , then , nullify the law by this faith ? Not at all ! Rather , we uphold the law .
What then shall we say that Abraham , our forefather according to the flesh , discovered in this matter ?
If , in fact , Abraham was justified by works , he had something to boast about—but not before God .
What does Scripture say ? “ Abraham believed God , and it was credited to him as righteousness . ”
Now to the one who works , wages are not credited as a gift but as an obligation .
However , to the one who does not work but trusts God who justifies the ungodly , their faith is credited as righteousness .
David says the same thing when he speaks of the blessedness of the one to whom God credits righteousness apart from works :
“ Blessed are those whose transgressions are forgiven , whose sins are covered .
Blessed is the one whose sin the Lord will never count against them . ”
Is this blessedness only for the circumcised , or also for the uncircumcised ? We have been saying that Abraham’s faith was credited to him as righteousness .
Under what circumstances was it credited ? Was it after he was circumcised , or before ? It was not after , but before !
And he received circumcision as a sign , a seal of the righteousness that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised . So then , he is the father of all who believe but have not been circumcised , in order that righteousness might be credited to them . 
And he is then also the father of the circumcised who not only are circumcised but who also follow in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had before he was circumcised .
It was not through the law that Abraham and his offspring received the promise that he would be heir of the world , but through the righteousness that comes by faith .
For if those who depend on the law are heirs , faith means nothing and the promise is worthless ,
because the law brings wrath . And where there is no law there is no transgression .
Therefore , the promise comes by faith , so that it may be by grace and may be guaranteed to all Abraham’s offspring—not only to those who are of the law but also to those who have the faith of Abraham . He is the father of us all . 
As it is written : “ I have made you a father of many nations . ” He is our father in the sight of God , in whom he believed—the God who gives life to the dead and calls into being things that were not .
Against all hope , Abraham in hope believed and so became the father of many nations , just as it had been said to him , “ So shall your offspring be . ”
Without weakening in his faith , he faced the fact that his body was as good as dead—since he was about a hundred years old—and that Sarah’s womb was also dead . 
Yet he did not waver through unbelief regarding the promise of God , but was strengthened in his faith and gave glory to God ,
being fully persuaded that God had power to do what he had promised . 
This is why “ it was credited to him as righteousness . ” 
The words “ it was credited to him ” were written not for him alone , 
but also for us , to whom God will credit righteousness — for us who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead . 
He was delivered over to death for our sins and was raised to life for our justification .
Therefore , since we have been justified through faith , we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ ,
through whom we have gained access by faith into this grace in which we now stand. And we boast in the hope of the glory of God . 
Not only so , but we also glory in our sufferings , because we know that suffering produces perseverance ;
perseverance , character ; and character , hope . 
And hope does not put us to shame , because God’s love has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit , who has been given to us .
You see , at just the right time , when we were still powerless , Christ died for the ungodly . 
Very rarely will anyone die for a righteous person , though for a good person someone might possibly dare to die .
But God demonstrates his own love for us in this : While we were still sinners , Christ died for us .
Since we have now been justified by his blood , how much more shall we be saved from God’s wrath through him ! 
For if , while we were God’s enemies , we were reconciled to him through the death of his Son , how much more , having been reconciled , shall we be saved through his life ! 
Not only is this so , but we also boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ , through whom we have now received reconciliation .
Therefore , just as sin entered the world through one man , and death through sin , and in this way death came to all people , because all sinned —
To be sure , sin was in the world before the law was given , but sin is not charged against anyone’s account where there is no law .
Nevertheless , death reigned from the time of Adam to the time of Moses , even over those who did not sin by breaking a command , as did Adam , who is a pattern of the one to come .
But the gift is not like the trespass . For if the many died by the trespass of the one man , how much more did God’s grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man , Jesus Christ , overflow to the many !
Nor can the gift of God be compared with the result of one man’s sin : The judgment followed one sin and brought condemnation , but the gift followed many trespasses and brought justification .
For if , by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man , how much more will those who receive God’s abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man , Jesus Christ !
Consequently , just as one trespass resulted in condemnation for all people , so also one righteous act resulted in justification and life for all people .
For just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners , so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous .
The law was brought in so that the trespass might increase . But where sin increased , grace increased all the more ,
so that , just as sin reigned in death , so also grace might reign through righteousness to bring eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord .
What shall we say , then ? Shall we go on sinning so that grace may increase ?
By no means ! We are those who have died to sin ; how can we live in it any longer ?
Or don’t you know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death ? 
We were therefore buried with him through baptism into death in order that , just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father , we too may live a new life .
For if we have been united with him in a death like his , we will certainly also be united with him in a resurrection like his .
For we know that our old self was crucified with him so that the body ruled by sin might be done away with , that we should no longer be slaves to sin .
because anyone who has died has been set free from sin .
Now if we died with Christ , we believe that we will also live with him .
For we know that since Christ was raised from the dead , he cannot die again ; death no longer has mastery over him . 
The death he died , he died to sin once for all ; but the life he lives , he lives to God .
In the same way , count yourselves dead to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus . 
Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its evil desires . 
Do not offer any part of yourself to sin as an instrument of wickedness , but rather offer yourselves to God as those who have been brought from death to life ; and offer every part of yourself to him as an instrument of righteousness .
For sin shall no longer be your master , because you are not under the law , but under grace .
What then ? Shall we sin because we are not under the law but under grace ? By no means ! 
Don’t you know that when you offer yourselves to someone as obedient slaves , you are slaves of the one you obey — whether you are slaves to sin , which leads to death , or to obedience , which leads to righteousness ?
But thanks be to God that , though you used to be slaves to sin , you have come to obey from your heart the pattern of teaching that has now claimed your allegiance . 
You have been set free from sin and have become slaves to righteousness .
I am using an example from everyday life because of your human limitations . Just as you used to offer yourselves as slaves to impurity and to ever-increasing wickedness , so now offer yourselves as slaves to righteousness leading to holiness . 
When you were slaves to sin , you were free from the control of righteousness . 
What benefit did you reap at that time from the things you are now ashamed of ? Those things result in death !
But now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves of God , the benefit you reap leads to holiness , and the result is eternal life .
For the wages of sin is death , but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord .
Do you not know , brothers and sisters — for I am speaking to those who know the law — that the law has authority over someone only as long as that person lives ?
For example , by law a married woman is bound to her husband as long as he is alive , but if her husband dies , she is released from the law that binds her to him . 
So then , if she has sexual relations with another man while her husband is still alive , she is called an adulteress . But if her husband dies , she is released from that law and is not an adulteress if she marries another man .
So , my brothers and sisters , you also died to the law through the body of Christ , that you might belong to another , to him who was raised from the dead , in order that we might bear fruit for God . 
For when we were in the realm of the flesh , the sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in us , so that we bore fruit for death . 
But now , by dying to what once bound us , we have been released from the law so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit , and not in the old way of the written code .
What shall we say , then ? Is the law sinful ? Certainly not! Nevertheless , I would not have known what sin was had it not been for the law . For I would not have known what coveting really was if the law had not said , “ You shall not covet . ”
But sin , seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment , produced in me every kind of coveting . For apart from the law , sin was dead . 
Once I was alive apart from the law; but when the commandment came , sin sprang to life and I died . 
I found that the very commandment that was intended to bring life actually brought death .
For sin , seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment , deceived me , and through the commandment put me to death . 
So then , the law is holy , and the commandment is holy , righteous and good .
Did that which is good , then , become death to me ? By no means ! Nevertheless , in order that sin might be recognized as sin , it used what is good to bring about my death , so that through the commandment sin might become utterly sinful .
We know that the law is spiritual ; but I am unspiritual , sold as a slave to sin . 
I do not understand what I do . For what I want to do I do not do , but what I hate I do . 
And if I do what I do not want to do, I agree that the law is good . 
As it is , it is no longer I myself who do it , but it is sin living in me . 
For I know that good itself does not dwell in me , that is , in my sinful nature . For I have the desire to do what is good , but I cannot carry it out .
For I do not do the good I want to do , but the evil I do not want to do — this I keep on doing . 
Now if I do what I do not want to do , it is no longer I who do it , but it is sin living in me that does it .
So I find this law at work : Although I want to do good , evil is right there with me . 
For in my inner being I delight in God’s law ; 
but I see another law at work in me , waging war against the law of my mind and making me a prisoner of the law of sin at work within me .
What a wretched man I am! Who will rescue me from this body that is subject to death ? 
Thanks be to God , who delivers me through Jesus Christ our Lord ! So then , I myself in my mind am a slave to God’s law , but in my sinful nature a slave to the law of sin .
Therefore , there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus ,
because through Christ Jesus the law of the Spirit who gives life has set you free from the law of sin and death .
For what the law was powerless to do because it was weakened by the flesh , God did by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh to be a sin offering . And so he condemned sin in the flesh ,
in order that the righteous requirement of the law might be fully met in us , who do not live according to the flesh but according to the Spirit .
Those who live according to the flesh have their minds set on what the flesh desires ; but those who live in accordance with the Spirit have their minds set on what the Spirit desires . 
The mind governed by the flesh is death , but the mind governed by the Spirit is life and peace . 
The mind governed by the flesh is hostile to God ; it does not submit to God’s law , nor can it do so . 
Those who are in the realm of the flesh cannot please God .
You , however , are not in the realm of the flesh but are in the realm of the Spirit , if indeed the Spirit of God lives in you . And if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ , they do not belong to Christ .
But if Christ is in you , then even though your body is subject to death because of sin , the Spirit gives life because of righteousness . 
And if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead is living in you , he who raised Christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies because of his Spirit who lives in you .
Therefore , brothers and sisters , we have an obligation—but it is not to the flesh , to live according to it . 
For if you live according to the flesh , you will die ; but if by the Spirit you put to death the misdeeds of the body , you will live .
For those who are led by the Spirit of God are the children of God . 
The Spirit you received does not make you slaves , so that you live in fear again ; rather , the Spirit you received brought about your adoption to sonship . And by him we cry , “ Abba , Father . ” 
The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children .
Now if we are children , then we are heirs—heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ , if indeed we share in his sufferings in order that we may also share in his glory .
consider that our present sufferings are not worth comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us .
For the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed . 
For the creation was subjected to frustration , not by its own choice , but by the will of the one who subjected it , in hope 
that the creation itself will be liberated from its bondage to decay and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of God .
We know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time .
Not only so , but we ourselves , who have the firstfruits of the Spirit , groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship , the redemption of our bodies .
For in this hope we were saved . But hope that is seen is no hope at all . Who hopes for what they already have ? 
But if we hope for what we do not yet have , we wait for it patiently .
In the same way , the Spirit helps us in our weakness . We do not know what we ought to pray for , but the Spirit himself intercedes for us through wordless groans . 
And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit , because the Spirit intercedes for God’s people in accordance with the will of God .
And we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him , who have been called according to his purpose . 
For those God foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son , that he might be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters . 
And those he predestined , he also called ; those he called , he also justified ; those he justified , he also glorified .
What , then , shall we say in response to these things ? If God is for us , who can be against us ? 
He who did not spare his own Son , but gave him up for us all—how will he not also , along with him , graciously give us all things ?
Who will bring any charge against those whom God has chosen ? It is God who justifies .
Who then is the one who condemns ? No one . Christ Jesus who died—more than that , who was raised to life—is at the right hand of God and is also interceding for us .
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ ? Shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword ? 
As it is written : “ For your sake we face death all day long ; we are considered as sheep to be slaughtered . ”
No , in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us .
For I am convinced that neither death nor life , neither angels nor demons , neither the present nor the future , nor any powers , 
neither height nor depth , nor anything else in all creation , will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord .
I speak the truth in Christ — I am not lying , my conscience confirms it through the Holy Spirit — 
I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart . 
For I could wish that I myself were cursed and cut off from Christ for the sake of my people , those of my own race ,
the people of Israel . Theirs is the adoption to sonship ; theirs the divine glory , the covenants , the receiving of the law , the temple worship and the promises . 
Theirs are the patriarchs , and from them is traced the human ancestry of the Messiah , who is God over all , forever praised ! Amen .
It is not as though God’s word had failed . For not all who are descended from Israel are Israel .
Nor because they are his descendants are they all Abraham’s children . On the contrary , “ It is through Isaac that your offspring will be reckoned . ”
In other words , it is not the children by physical descent who are God’s children , but it is the children of the promise who are regarded as Abraham’s offspring . 
For this was how the promise was stated : “ At the appointed time I will return , and Sarah will have a son . ”
Not only that , but Rebekah’s children were conceived at the same time by our father Isaac .
Yet , before the twins were born or had done anything good or bad — in order that God’s purpose in election might stand :
not by works but by him who calls—she was told , “ The older will serve the younger . ”
Just as it is written : “ Jacob I loved , but Esau I hated . ”
What then shall we say ? Is God unjust ? Not at all !
For he says to Moses , “ I will have mercy on whom I have mercy , and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion . ”
It does not , therefore , depend on human desire or effort , but on God’s mercy .
For Scripture says to Pharaoh : “ I raised you up for this very purpose , that I might display my power in you and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth . ”
Therefore God has mercy on whom he wants to have mercy , and he hardens whom he wants to harden .
One of you will say to me : “ Then why does God still blame us ? For who is able to resist his will ? ” 
But who are you , a human being , to talk back to God ? “ Shall what is formed say to the one who formed it , ‘ Why did you make me like this ? ’ ”
Does not the potter have the right to make out of the same lump of clay some pottery for special purposes and some for common use ?
What if God , although choosing to show his wrath and make his power known  , bore with great patience the objects of his wrath — prepared for destruction ? 
What if he did this to make the riches of his glory known to the objects of his mercy , whom he prepared in advance for glory — 
even us , whom he also called , not only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles ? 
As he says in Hosea : “ I will call them ‘my people’ who are not my people ; and I will call her ‘my loved one’ who is not my loved one , ”
and , “ In the very place where it was said to them , ‘You are not my people , ’ there they will be called ‘children of the living God . ’ ”
Isaiah cries out concerning Israel : “ Though the number of the Israelites be like the sand by the sea , only the remnant will be saved .
For the Lord will carry out his sentence on earth with speed and finality . ”
It is just as Isaiah said previously : “ Unless the Lord Almighty had left us descendants , we would have become like Sodom , we would have been like Gomorrah . ”
What then shall we say ? That the Gentiles , who did not pursue righteousness , have obtained it , a righteousness that is by faith ;
but the people of Israel , who pursued the law as the way of righteousness , have not attained their goal . 
Why not ? Because they pursued it not by faith but as if it were by works . They stumbled over the stumbling stone . 
As it is written : “ See , I lay in Zion a stone that causes people to stumble and a rock that makes them fall , and the one who believes in him will never be put to shame . ”
Brothers and sisters , my heart’s desire and prayer to God for the Israelites is that they may be saved . 
For I can testify about them that they are zealous for God , but their zeal is not based on knowledge . 
Since they did not know the righteousness of God and sought to establish their own , they did not submit to God’s righteousness . 
Christ is the culmination of the law so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes .
Moses writes this about the righteousness that is by the law : “ The person who does these things will live by them . ”
But the righteousness that is by faith says : “ Do not say in your heart , ‘ Who will ascend into heaven ? ’ ” (that is , to bring Christ down ) 
“ or ‘ Who will descend into the deep ? ’ ” (that is , to bring Christ up from the dead) .
But what does it say ? “ The word is near you ; it is in your mouth and in your heart , ” that is , the message concerning faith that we proclaim :
If you declare with your mouth , “ Jesus is Lord , ” and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead , you will be saved .
For it is with your heart that you believe and are justified , and it is with your mouth that you profess your faith and are saved .
As Scripture says , “ Anyone who believes in him will never be put to shame . ”
For there is no difference between Jew and Gentile—the same Lord is Lord of all and richly blesses all who call on him , 
for , “ Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved . ”
How , then , can they call on the one they have not believed in ? And how can they believe in the one of whom they have not heard ? And how can they hear without someone preaching to them ? 
And how can anyone preach unless they are sent? As it is written : “ How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news ! ”
But not all the Israelites accepted the good news . For Isaiah says , “ Lord , who has believed our message ? ”
Consequently , faith comes from hearing the message , and the message is heard through the word about Christ . 
But I ask : Did they not hear ? Of course they did : “ Their voice has gone out into all the earth , their words to the ends of the world  . 
” Again I ask : Did Israel not understand ? First , Moses says , “ I will make you envious by those who are not a nation ; I will make you angry by a nation that has no understanding . ”
And Isaiah boldly says , “ I was found by those who did not seek me ; I revealed myself to those who did not ask for me . ”
But concerning Israel he says , “ All day long I have held out my hands to a disobedient and obstinate people . ”
I ask then : Did God reject his people ? By no means ! I am an Israelite myself , a descendant of Abraham , from the tribe of Benjamin . 
God did not reject his people , whom he foreknew . Don’t you know what Scripture says in the passage about Elijah — how he appealed to God against Israel :
“ Lord , they have killed your prophets and torn down your altars ; I am the only one left , and they are trying to kill me ” ?
And what was God’s answer to him ?  “ I have reserved for myself seven thousand who have not bowed the knee to Baal . ”
So too , at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace . 
And if by grace , then it cannot be based on works ; if it were , grace would no longer be grace .
What then ? What the people of Israel sought so earnestly they did not obtain . The elect among them did , but the others were hardened ,
as it is written : “ God gave them a spirit of stupor , eyes that could not see and ears that could not hear , to this very day . ”
And David says : “ May their table become a snare and a trap , a stumbling block and a retribution for them .
May their eyes be darkened so they cannot see , and their backs be bent forever . ”
Again I ask : Did they stumble so as to fall beyond recovery ? Not at all ! Rather , because of their transgression , salvation has come to the Gentiles to make Israel envious .
But if their transgression means riches for the world , and their loss means riches for the Gentiles , how much greater riches will their full inclusion bring !
I am talking to you Gentiles . In as much as I am the apostle to the Gentiles , I take pride in my ministry
in the hope that I may somehow arouse my own people to envy and save some of them . 
For if their rejection brought reconciliation to the world , what will their acceptance be but life from the dead ? 
If the part of the dough offered as first fruits is holy , then the whole batch is holy ; if the root is holy , so are the branches .
If some of the branches have been broken off , and you , though a wild olive shoot , have been grafted in among the others and now share in the nourishing sap from the olive root , 
do not consider yourself to be superior to those other branches . If you do , consider this: You do not support the root , but the root supports you . 
You will say then , “ Branches were broken off so that I could be grafted in . ” 
Granted . But they were broken off because of unbelief , and you stand by faith . Do not be arrogant , but tremble . 
For if God did not spare the natural branches , he will not spare you either .
Consider therefore the kindness and sternness of God : sternness to those who fell , but kindness to you , provided that you continue in his kindness . Otherwise , you also will be cut off .
And if they do not persist in unbelief , they will be grafted in , for God is able to graft them in again . 
After all , if you were cut out of an olive tree that is wild by nature , and contrary to nature were grafted into a cultivated olive tree , how much more readily will these , the natural branches , be grafted into their own olive tree !
I do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery , brothers and sisters , so that you may not be conceited : Israel has experienced a hardening in part until the full number of the Gentiles has come in , 
and in this way all Israel will be saved . As it is written : “ The deliverer will come from Zion ; he will turn godlessness away from Jacob .
And this is[f] my covenant with them when I take away their sins . ”
As far as the gospel is concerned , they are enemies for your sake ; but as far as election is concerned , they are loved on account of the patriarchs ,
for God’s gifts and his call are irrevocable .
Just as you who were at one time disobedient to God have now received mercy as a result of their disobedience , 
so they too have now become disobedient in order that they too may now[h] receive mercy as a result of God’s mercy to you . 
For God has bound everyone over to disobedience so that he may have mercy on them all .
Oh , the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God ! How unsearchable his judgments , and his paths beyond tracing out !
“ Who has known the mind of the Lord ? Or who has been his counselor ? ”
“ Who has ever given to God , that God should repay them ? ”
For from him and through him and for him are all things . To him be the glory forever ! Amen .
Therefore , I urge you , brothers and sisters , in view of God’s mercy , to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice , holy and pleasing to God—this is your true and proper worship . 
Do not conform to the pattern of this world , but be transformed by the renewing of your mind . Then you will be able to test and approve what God’s will is — his good , pleasing and perfect will .
For by the grace given me I say to every one of you: Do not think of yourself more highly than you ought , but rather think of yourself with sober judgment , in accordance with the faith God has distributed to each of you .
For just as each of us has one body with many members , and these members do not all have the same function , 
so in Christ we , though many , form one body , and each member belongs to all the others .
We have different gifts , according to the grace given to each of us . If your gift is prophesying, then prophesy in accordance with your faith ;
if it is serving , then serve; if it is teaching , then teach ; 
if it is to encourage , then give encouragement ; if it is giving , then give generously ; if it is to lead , do it diligently ; if it is to show mercy , do it cheerfully . 
Love must be sincere . Hate what is evil ; cling to what is good . 
Be devoted to one another in love . Honor one another above yourselves .
Never be lacking in zeal , but keep your spiritual fervor , serving the Lord .
Be joyful in hope , patient in affliction , faithful in prayer . 
Share with the Lord’s people who are in need . Practice hospitality .
Bless those who persecute you ; bless and do not curse . 
Rejoice with those who rejoice ; mourn with those who mourn . 
Live in harmony with one another . Do not be proud , but be willing to associate with people of low position . Do not be conceited .
Do not repay anyone evil for evil . Be careful to do what is right in the eyes of everyone . 
If it is possible , as far as it depends on you , live at peace with everyone . 
Do not take revenge , my dear friends , but leave room for God’s wrath , for it is written : “ It is mine to avenge ; I will repay , ” says the Lord . 
On the contrary : “ If your enemy is hungry , feed him ; if he is thirsty , give him something to drink . In doing this , you will heap burning coals on his head . ”
Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good .
Let everyone be subject to the governing authorities , for there is no authority except that which God has established . The authorities that exist have been established by God . 
Consequently , whoever rebels against the authority is rebelling against what God has instituted , and those who do so will bring judgment on themselves .
For rulers hold no terror for those who do right , but for those who do wrong . Do you want to be free from fear of the one in authority ? Then do what is right and you will be commended .
For the one in authority is God’s servant for your good . But if you do wrong , be afraid , for rulers do not bear the sword for no reason . They are God’s servants , agents of wrath to bring punishment on the wrongdoer . 
Therefore , it is necessary to submit to the authorities , not only because of possible punishment but also as a matter of conscience .
This is also why you pay taxes , for the authorities are God’s servants , who give their full time to governing . 
Give to everyone what you owe them : If you owe taxes , pay taxes ; if revenue , then revenue ; if respect , then respect ; if honor , then honor .
Let no debt remain outstanding , except the continuing debt to love one another , for whoever loves others has fulfilled the law .
The commandments , “ You shall not commit adultery , ” “ You shall not murder , ” “ You shall not steal , ” “ You shall not covet , ” and whatever other command there may be , are summed up in this one command : “ Love your neighbor as yourself . ”
Love does no harm to a neighbor . Therefore love is the fulfillment of the law .
And do this , understanding the present time : The hour has already come for you to wake up from your slumber , because our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed . 
The night is nearly over ; the day is almost here . So let us put aside the deeds of darkness and put on the armor of light .
Let us behave decently , as in the daytime , not in carousing and drunkenness , not in sexual immorality and debauchery , not in dissension and jealousy . 
Rather , clothe yourselves with the Lord Jesus Christ , and do not think about how to gratify the desires of the flesh .
Accept the one whose faith is weak , without quarreling over disputable matters .
One person’s faith allows them to eat anything , but another , whose faith is weak , eats only vegetables .
The one who eats everything must not treat with contempt the one who does not , and the one who does not eat everything must not judge the one who does , for God has accepted them . 
Who are you to judge someone else’s servant ? To their own master , servants stand or fall . And they will stand , for the Lord is able to make them stand .
One person considers one day more sacred than another ; another considers every day alike . Each of them should be fully convinced in their own mind . 
Whoever regards one day as special does so to the Lord . Whoever eats meat does so to the Lord , for they give thanks to God ; and whoever abstains does so to the Lord and gives thanks to God .
For none of us lives for ourselves alone , and none of us dies for ourselves alone . 
If we live , we live for the Lord; and if we die , we die for the Lord . So , whether we live or die , we belong to the Lord . 
For this very reason , Christ died and returned to life so that he might be the Lord of both the dead and the living .
You , then, why do you judge your brother or sister ? Or why do you treat them with contempt ? For we will all stand before God’s judgment seat . 
It is written : “ ‘ As surely as I live , ’ says the Lord , ‘ every knee will bow before me ; every tongue will acknowledge God . ’ ”
So then , each of us will give an account of ourselves to God .
Therefore let us stop passing judgment on one another . Instead , make up your mind not to put any stumbling block or obstacle in the way of a brother or sister .
I am convinced , being fully persuaded in the Lord Jesus , that nothing is unclean in itself . But if anyone regards something as unclean , then for that person it is unclean .
If your brother or sister is distressed because of what you eat , you are no longer acting in love . Do not by your eating destroy someone for whom Christ died .
Therefore do not let what you know is good be spoken of as evil . 
For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking , but of righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit , 
because anyone who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and receives human approval .
Let us therefore make every effort to do what leads to peace and to mutual edification .
Do not destroy the work of God for the sake of food . All food is clean , but it is wrong for a person to eat anything that causes someone else to stumble .
It is better not to eat meat or drink wine or to do anything else that will cause your brother or sister to fall .
So whatever you believe about these things keep between yourself and God . Blessed is the one who does not condemn himself by what he approves . 
But whoever has doubts is condemned if they eat , because their eating is not from faith ; and everything that does not come from faith is sin .
We who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not to please ourselves .
Each of us should please our neighbors for their good , to build them up .
For even Christ did not please himself but , as it is written : “ The insults of those who insult you have fallen on me . ”
For everything that was written in the past was written to teach us , so that through the endurance taught in the Scriptures and the encouragement they provide we might have hope .
May the God who gives endurance and encouragement give you the same attitude of mind toward each other that Christ Jesus had , 
so that with one mind and one voice you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Accept one another , then , just as Christ accepted you , in order to bring praise to God . 
For I tell you that Christ has become a servant of the Jews on behalf of God’s truth , so that the promises made to the patriarchs might be confirmed 
and , moreover , that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy . As it is written : “ Therefore I will praise you among the Gentiles ; I will sing the praises of your name . ”
Again , it says , “ Rejoice, you Gentiles , with his people . ”
And again , “ Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles ; let all the peoples extol him . ”
And again , Isaiah says , “ The Root of Jesse will spring up, one who will arise to rule over the nations ; in him the Gentiles will hope . ”
May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in him , so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy Spirit .
I myself am convinced , my brothers and sisters , that you yourselves are full of goodness , filled with knowledge and competent to instruct one another .
Yet I have written you quite boldly on some points to remind you of them again , because of the grace God gave me 
to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles . He gave me the priestly duty of proclaiming the gospel of God , so that the Gentiles might become an offering acceptable to God , sanctified by the Holy Spirit .
Therefore I glory in Christ Jesus in my service to God . 
I will not venture to speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me in leading the Gentiles to obey God by what I have said and done — 
by the power of signs and wonders , through the power of the Spirit of God . So from Jerusalem all the way around to Illyricum , I have fully proclaimed the gospel of Christ . 
It has always been my ambition to preach the gospel where Christ was not known , so that I would not be building on someone else’s foundation . 
Rather , as it is written : “ Those who were not told about him will see , and those who have not heard will understand . ”
This is why I have often been hindered from coming to you .
But now that there is no more place for me to work in these regions , and since I have been longing for many years to visit you ,
I plan to do so when I go to Spain . I hope to see you while passing through and to have you assist me on my journey there , after I have enjoyed your company for a while .
Now , however , I am on my way to Jerusalem in the service of the Lord’s people there .
For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make a contribution for the poor among the Lord’s people in Jerusalem . 
They were pleased to do it , and indeed they owe it to them . For if the Gentiles have shared in the Jews’ spiritual blessings , they owe it to the Jews to share with them their material blessings . 
So after I have completed this task and have made sure that they have received this contribution , I will go to Spain and visit you on the way . 
I know that when I come to you , I will come in the full measure of the blessing of Christ .
I urge you , brothers and sisters , by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit , to join me in my struggle by praying to God for me . 
Pray that I may be kept safe from the unbelievers in Judea and that the contribution I take to Jerusalem may be favorably received by the Lord’s people there , 
so that I may come to you with joy , by God’s will , and in your company be refreshed . 
The God of peace be with you all . Amen .
I commend to you our sister Phoebe , a deacon of the church in Cenchreae .
I ask you to receive her in the Lord in a way worthy of his people and to give her any help she may need from you , for she has been the benefactor of many people , including me .
Greet Priscilla and Aquila , my co-workers in Christ Jesus . 
They risked their lives for me . Not only I but all the churches of the Gentiles are grateful to them .
Greet also the church that meets at their house . Greet my dear friend Epenetus , who was the first convert to Christ in the province of Asia .
Greet Mary , who worked very hard for you .
Greet Andronicus and Junia , my fellow Jews who have been in prison with me . They are outstanding among the apostles , and they were in Christ before I was .
Greet Ampliatus , my dear friend in the Lord . 
Greet Urbanus, our co-worker in Christ , and my dear friend Stachys .
Greet Apelles , whose fidelity to Christ has stood the test . Greet those who belong to the household of Aristobulus .
Greet Herodion , my fellow Jew . Greet those in the household of Narcissus who are in the Lord .
Greet Tryphena and Tryphosa , those women who work hard in the Lord . Greet my dear friend Persis , another woman who has worked very hard in the Lord .
Greet Rufus , chosen in the Lord , and his mother , who has been a mother to me , too .
Greet Asyncritus , Phlegon , Hermes , Patrobas , Hermas and the other brothers and sisters with them .
Greet Philologus , Julia , Nereus and his sister , and Olympas and all the Lord’s people who are with them .
Greet one another with a holy kiss . All the churches of Christ send greetings .
I urge you , brothers and sisters , to watch out for those who cause divisions and put obstacles in your way that are contrary to the teaching you have learned . Keep away from them .
For such people are not serving our Lord Christ , but their own appetites . By smooth talk and flattery they deceive the minds of naive people . 
Everyone has heard about your obedience , so I rejoice because of you ; but I want you to be wise about what is good , and innocent about what is evil .
The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet . The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you.
Timothy , my co-worker , sends his greetings to you , as do Lucius , Jason and Sosipater , my fellow Jews .
I , Tertius , who wrote down this letter, greet you in the Lord .
Gaius , whose hospitality I and the whole church here enjoy , sends you his greetings . Erastus , who is the city’s director of public works , and our brother Quartus send you their greetings .
May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you . Amen .
Now to him who is able to establish you in accordance with my gospel , the message I proclaim about Jesus Christ , in keeping with the revelation of the mystery hidden for long ages past  , 
but now revealed and made known through the prophetic writings by the command of the eternal God , so that all the Gentiles might come to the obedience that comes from faith — 
to the only wise God be glory forever through Jesus Christ ! Amen .
Paul , called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God , and our brother Sosthenes ,
To the church of God in Corinth , to those sanctified in Christ Jesus and called to be his holy people , together with all those everywhere who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ — their Lord and ours :
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
I always thank my God for you because of his grace given you in Christ Jesus . 
For in him you have been enriched in every way — with all kinds of speech and with all knowledge — 
God thus confirming our testimony about Christ among you .
Therefore you do not lack any spiritual gift as you eagerly wait for our Lord Jesus Christ to be revealed .
He will also keep you firm to the end , so that you will be blameless on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ . 
God is faithful , who has called you into fellowship with his Son , Jesus Christ our Lord .
I appeal to you , brothers and sisters , in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , that all of you agree with one another in what you say and that there be no divisions among you , but that you be perfectly united in mind and thought .
My brothers and sisters , some from Chloe’s household have informed me that there are quarrels among you . 
What I mean is this : One of you says , “ I follow Paul ” ; another , “ I follow Apollos ” ; another , “ I follow Cephas ” ; still another , “ I follow Christ . ”
Is Christ divided ? Was Paul crucified for you ? Were you baptized in the name of Paul ?
I thank God that I did not baptize any of you except Crispus and Gaius , 
so no one can say that you were baptized in my name . 
Yes , I also baptized the household of Stephanas ; beyond that , I don’t remember if I baptized anyone else .
For Christ did not send me to baptize , but to preach the gospel — not with wisdom and eloquence , lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power .
For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing , but to us who are being saved it is the power of God .
For it is written : “ I will destroy the wisdom of the wise ; the intelligence of the intelligent I will frustrate . ”
Where is the wise person ? Where is the teacher of the law ? Where is the philosopher of this age ? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world ?
For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him , God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe . 
Jews demand signs and Greeks look for wisdom ,
but we preach Christ crucified: a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles ,
but to those whom God has called, both Jews and Greeks , Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God . 
For the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom , and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength .
Brothers and sisters , think of what you were when you were called . Not many of you were wise by human standards ; not many were influential ; not many were of noble birth . 
But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise ; God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong .
God chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things — and the things that are not — to nullify the things that are , 
so that no one may boast before him . 
It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus , who has become for us wisdom from God — that is , our righteousness , holiness and redemption . 
Therefore , as it is written : “ Let the one who boasts boast in the Lord . ”
And so it was with me , brothers and sisters . When I came to you , I did not come with eloquence or human wisdom as I proclaimed to you the testimony about God .
For I resolved to know nothing while I was with you except Jesus Christ and him crucified .
I came to you in weakness with great fear and trembling .
My message and my preaching were not with wise and persuasive words , but with a demonstration of the Spirit’s power , 
so that your faith might not rest on human wisdom , but on God’s power .
We do , however , speak a message of wisdom among the mature , but not the wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age , who are coming to nothing . 
No , we declare God’s wisdom , a mystery that has been hidden and that God destined for our glory before time began .
None of the rulers of this age understood it , for if they had, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory .
However , as it is written : “ What no eye has seen , what no ear has heard , and what no human mind has conceived ” — the things God has prepared for those who love him —
these are the things God has revealed to us by his Spirit . The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God .
For who knows a person’s thoughts except their own spirit within them ? In the same way no one knows the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God . 
What we have received is not the spirit of the world , but the Spirit who is from God , so that we may understand what God has freely given us .
This is what we speak , not in words taught us by human wisdom but in words taught by the Spirit , explaining spiritual realities with Spirit - taught words .
The person without the Spirit does not accept the things that come from the Spirit of God but considers them foolishness , and cannot understand them because they are discerned only through the Spirit . 
The person with the Spirit makes judgments about all things , but such a person is not subject to merely human judgments , 
for , “ Who has known the mind of the Lord so as to instruct him ? ” But we have the mind of Christ .
Brothers and sisters , I could not address you as people who live by the Spirit but as people who are still worldly — mere infants in Christ . 
I gave you milk , not solid food , for you were not yet ready for it . Indeed , you are still not ready .
You are still worldly . For since there is jealousy and quarreling among you , are you not worldly ? Are you not acting like mere humans ? 
For when one says , “ I follow Paul , ” and another , “ I follow Apollos , ” are you not mere human beings ? 
What , after all , is Apollos ? And what is Paul? Only servants , through whom you came to believe — as the Lord has assigned to each his task .
I planted the seed , Apollos watered it , but God has been making it grow .
So neither the one who plants nor the one who waters is anything , but only God , who makes things grow .
The one who plants and the one who waters have one purpose , and they will each be rewarded according to their own labor . 
For we are co-workers in God’s service ; you are God’s field , God’s building .
By the grace God has given me , I laid a foundation as a wise builder , and someone else is building on it . But each one should build with care . 
For no one can lay any foundation other than the one already laid , which is Jesus Christ . 
If anyone builds on this foundation using gold , silver , costly stones , wood , hay or straw , 
their work will be shown for what it is , because the Day will bring it to light . It will be revealed with fire , and the fire will test the quality of each person’s work .
If what has been built survives , the builder will receive a reward . 
If it is burned up , the builder will suffer loss but yet will be saved — even though only as one escaping through the flames .
Don’t you know that you yourselves are God’s temple and that God’s Spirit dwells in your midst ? 
If anyone destroys God’s temple , God will destroy that person ; for God’s temple is sacred , and you together are that temple .
Do not deceive yourselves . If any of you think you are wise by the standards of this age , you should become “ fools ” so that you may become wise . 
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness in God’s sight . As it is written : “ He catches the wise in their craftiness ” ; 
and again , “ The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise are futile . ”
So then , no more boasting about human leaders ! All things are yours ,
whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or the present or the future — all are yours , 
and you are of Christ, and Christ is of God.
This , then , is how you ought to regard us : as servants of Christ and as those entrusted with the mysteries God has revealed . 
Now it is required that those who have been given a trust must prove faithful .
I care very little if I am judged by you or by any human court ; indeed , I do not even judge myself .
My conscience is clear , but that does not make me innocent . It is the Lord who judges me . 
Therefore judge nothing before the appointed time ; wait until the Lord comes . He will bring to light what is hidden in darkness and will expose the motives of the heart . At that time each will receive their praise from God .
Now , brothers and sisters , I have applied these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit , so that you may learn from us the meaning of the saying , “ Do not go beyond what is written . ” Then you will not be puffed up in being a follower of one of us over against the other . 
For who makes you different from anyone else ? What do you have that you did not receive ? And if you did receive it , why do you boast as though you did not ?
Already you have all you want ! Already you have become rich ! You have begun to reign — and that without us ! How I wish that you really had begun to reign so that we also might reign with you ! 
For it seems to me that God has put us apostles on display at the end of the procession , like those condemned to die in the arena . We have been made a spectacle to the whole universe , to angels as well as to human beings .
We are fools for Christ , but you are so wise in Christ ! We are weak, but you are strong ! You are honored , we are dishonored !
To this very hour we go hungry and thirsty , we are in rags , we are brutally treated , we are homeless .
We work hard with our own hands . When we are cursed , we bless ; when we are persecuted , we endure it ; 
when we are slandered , we answer kindly . We have become the scum of the earth , the garbage of the world — right up to this moment .
I am writing this not to shame you but to warn you as my dear children .
Even if you had ten thousand guardians in Christ , you do not have many fathers , for in Christ Jesus I became your father through the gospel .
Therefore I urge you to imitate me . 
For this reason I have sent to you Timothy , my son whom I love , who is faithful in the Lord . He will remind you of my way of life in Christ Jesus , which agrees with what I teach everywhere in every church .
Some of you have become arrogant , as if I were not coming to you .
But I will come to you very soon , if the Lord is willing , and then I will find out not only how these arrogant people are talking , but what power they have .
For the kingdom of God is not a matter of talk but of power . 
What do you prefer ? Shall I come to you with a rod of discipline , or shall I come in love and with a gentle spirit ?
It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you , and of a kind that even pagans do not tolerate : A man is sleeping with his father’s wife . 
And you are proud ! Shouldn’t you rather have gone into mourning and have put out of your fellowship the man who has been doing this ?
For my part , even though I am not physically present , I am with you in spirit . As one who is present with you in this way , I have already passed judgment in the name of our Lord Jesus on the one who has been doing this .
So when you are assembled and I am with you in spirit , and the power of our Lord Jesus is present , 
hand this man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh , so that his spirit may be saved on the day of the Lord .
Your boasting is not good . Don’t you know that a little yeast leavens the whole batch of dough ?
Get rid of the old yeast , so that you may be a new unleavened batch—as you really are . For Christ , our Passover lamb , has been sacrificed . 
Therefore let us keep the Festival , not with the old bread leavened with malice and wickedness , but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth .
I wrote to you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people — 
not at all meaning the people of this world who are immoral , or the greedy and swindlers , or idolaters . In that case you would have to leave this world . 
But now I am writing to you that you must not associate with anyone who claims to be a brother or sister but is sexually immoral or greedy , an idolater or slanderer , a drunkard or swindler . Do not even eat with such people .
What business is it of mine to judge those outside the church ? Are you not to judge those inside ? 
God will judge those outside . “ Expel the wicked person from among you . ”
If any of you has a dispute with another , do you dare to take it before the ungodly for judgment instead of before the Lord’s people ? 
Or do you not know that the Lord’s people will judge the world ? And if you are to judge the world , are you not competent to judge trivial cases ?
Do you not know that we will judge angels ? How much more the things of this life !
Therefore , if you have disputes about such matters , do you ask for a ruling from those whose way of life is scorned in the church ?
I say this to shame you . Is it possible that there is nobody among you wise enough to judge a dispute between believers ? 
But instead , one brother takes another to court — and this in front of unbelievers !
The very fact that you have lawsuits among you means you have been completely defeated already . Why not rather be wronged ? Why not rather be cheated ?
Instead , you yourselves cheat and do wrong , and you do this to your brothers and sisters .
Or do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of God ? Do not be deceived : Neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor men who have sex with men
nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor slanderers nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God .
And that is what some of you were . But you were washed , you were sanctified , you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God .
“ I have the right to do anything , ” you say—but not everything is beneficial . “ I have the right to do anything ” — but I will not be mastered by anything .
You say , “ Food for the stomach and the stomach for food , and God will destroy them both . ” The body , however , is not meant for sexual immorality but for the Lord , and the Lord for the body .
By his power God raised the Lord from the dead , and he will raise us also .
Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ himself ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and unite them with a prostitute ? Never ! 
Do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body ? For it is said , “ The two will become one flesh . ”
But whoever is united with the Lord is one with him in spirit .
Flee from sexual immorality . All other sins a person commits are outside the body , but whoever sins sexually , sins against their own body .
Do you not know that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit , who is in you , whom you have received from God ? You are not your own ; 
you were bought at a price . Therefore honor God with your bodies .
Now for the matters you wrote about : “ It is good for a man not to have sexual relations with a woman . ”
But since sexual immorality is occurring , each man should have sexual relations with his own wife , and each woman with her own husband .
The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife , and likewise the wife to her husband .
The wife does not have authority over her own body but yields it to her husband . In the same way, the husband does not have authority over his own body but yields it to his wife .
Do not deprive each other except perhaps by mutual consent and for a time , so that you may devote yourselves to prayer . Then come together again so that Satan will not tempt you because of your lack of self-control .
I say this as a concession , not as a command . 
I wish that all of you were as I am . But each of you has your own gift from God ; one has this gift , another has that .
Now to the unmarried and the widows I say : It is good for them to stay unmarried , as I do . 
But if they cannot control themselves , they should marry , for it is better to marry than to burn with passion .
To the married I give this command ( not I , but the Lord ) : A wife must not separate from her husband . 
But if she does , she must remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband . And a husband must not divorce his wife .
To the rest I say this (I , not the Lord) : If any brother has a wife who is not a believer and she is willing to live with him , he must not divorce her .
And if a woman has a husband who is not a believer and he is willing to live with her , she must not divorce him . 
For the unbelieving husband has been sanctified through his wife , and the unbelieving wife has been sanctified through her believing husband . Otherwise your children would be unclean , but as it is , they are holy .
But if the unbeliever leaves , let it be so . The brother or the sister is not bound in such circumstances ; God has called us to live in peace . 
How do you know , wife , whether you will save your husband ? Or , how do you know , husband , whether you will save your wife ?
Nevertheless , each person should live as a believer in whatever situation the Lord has assigned to them , just as God has called them . This is the rule I lay down in all the churches .
Was a man already circumcised when he was called? He should not become uncircumcised . Was a man uncircumcised when he was called ? He should not be circumcised .
Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing . Keeping God’s commands is what counts . 
Each person should remain in the situation they were in when God called them .
Were you a slave when you were called ? Don’t let it trouble you — although if you can gain your freedom , do so .
For the one who was a slave when called to faith in the Lord is the Lord’s freed person ; similarly , the one who was free when called is Christ’s slave .
You were bought at a price ; do not become slaves of human beings . 
Brothers and sisters , each person , as responsible to God , should remain in the situation they were in when God called them .
Now about virgins : I have no command from the Lord , but I give a judgment as one who by the Lord’s mercy is trustworthy . 
Because of the present crisis , I think that it is good for a man to remain as he is .
Are you pledged to a woman ? Do not seek to be released . Are you free from such a commitment ? Do not look for a wife . 
But if you do marry , you have not sinned ; and if a virgin marries , she has not sinned . But those who marry will face many troubles in this life , and I want to spare you this .
What I mean , brothers and sisters , is that the time is short . From now on those who have wives should live as if they do not ; 
those who mourn , as if they did not ; those who are happy , as if they were not ; those who buy something, as if it were not theirs to keep ; 
those who use the things of the world , as if not engrossed in them . For this world in its present form is passing away .
I would like you to be free from concern . An unmarried man is concerned about the Lord’s affairs — how he can please the Lord .
But a married man is concerned about the affairs of this world — how he can please his wife — 
and his interests are divided . An unmarried woman or virgin is concerned about the Lord’s affairs : Her aim is to be devoted to the Lord in both body and spirit . But a married woman is concerned about the affairs of this world — how she can please her husband . 
I am saying this for your own good, not to restrict you , but that you may live in a right way in undivided devotion to the Lord .
If anyone is worried that he might not be acting honorably toward the virgin he is engaged to , and if his passions are too strong and he feels he ought to marry , he should do as he wants . He is not sinning . They should get married .
But the man who has settled the matter in his own mind , who is under no compulsion but has control over his own will , and who has made up his mind not to marry the virgin — this man also does the right thing . 
So then , he who marries the virgin does right , but he who does not marry her does better .
A woman is bound to her husband as long as he lives . But if her husband dies , she is free to marry anyone she wishes , but he must belong to the Lord . 
In my judgment , she is happier if she stays as she is — and I think that I too have the Spirit of God .
Now about food sacrificed to idols : We know that “ We all possess knowledge . ” But knowledge puffs up while love builds up .
Those who think they know something do not yet know as they ought to know .
But whoever loves God is known by God .
So then , about eating food sacrificed to idols : We know that “ An idol is nothing at all in the world ” and that “There is no God but one . ”
For even if there are so-called gods , whether in heaven or on earth (as indeed there are many “gods” and many “lords”) , 
yet for us there is but one God , the Father , from whom all things came and for whom we live ; and there is but one Lord , Jesus Christ , through whom all things came and through whom we live .
But not everyone possesses this knowledge . Some people are still so accustomed to idols that when they eat sacrificial food they think of it as having been sacrificed to a god , and since their conscience is weak , it is defiled . 
But food does not bring us near to God ; we are no worse if we do not eat , and no better if we do .
Be careful , however , that the exercise of your rights does not become a stumbling block to the weak .
For if someone with a weak conscience sees you , with all your knowledge , eating in an idol’s temple , won’t that person be emboldened to eat what is sacrificed to idols ?
So this weak brother or sister , for whom Christ died , is destroyed by your knowledge .
When you sin against them in this way and wound their weak conscience , you sin against Christ . 
Therefore , if what I eat causes my brother or sister to fall into sin , I will never eat meat again , so that I will not cause them to fall .
Am I not free ? Am I not an apostle ? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord ? Are you not the result of my work in the Lord ? 
Even though I may not be an apostle to others , surely I am to you ! For you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord .
This is my defense to those who sit in judgment on me .
Don’t we have the right to food and drink ?
Don’t we have the right to take a believing wife along with us , as do the other apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Cephas ? 
Or is it only I and Barnabas who lack the right to not work for a living ?
Who serves as a soldier at his own expense ? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat its grapes ? Who tends a flock and does not drink the milk ? 
Do I say this merely on human authority ? Doesn’t the Law say the same thing ?
For it is written in the Law of Moses : “ Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain . ” Is it about oxen that God is concerned ? 
Surely he says this for us , doesn’t he ? Yes , this was written for us , because whoever plows and threshes should be able to do so in the hope of sharing in the harvest .
If we have sown spiritual seed among you , is it too much if we reap a material harvest from you ?
If others have this right of support from you , shouldn’t we have it all the more ? But we did not use this right . On the contrary , we put up with anything rather than hinder the gospel of Christ .
Don’t you know that those who serve in the temple get their food from the temple , and that those who serve at the altar share in what is offered on the altar ? 
In the same way , the Lord has commanded that those who preach the gospel should receive their living from the gospel .
But I have not used any of these rights . And I am not writing this in the hope that you will do such things for me , for I would rather die than allow anyone to deprive me of this boast .
For when I preach the gospel , I cannot boast , since I am compelled to preach . Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel !
If I preach voluntarily , I have a reward ; if not voluntarily , I am simply discharging the trust committed to me . 
What then is my reward ? Just this : that in preaching the gospel I may offer it free of charge , and so not make full use of my rights as a preacher of the gospel .
Though I am free and belong to no one , I have made myself a slave to everyone , to win as many as possible .
To the Jews I became like a Jew , to win the Jews . To those under the law I became like one under the law (though I myself am not under the law) , so as to win those under the law .
To those not having the law I became like one not having the law (though I am not free from God’s law but am under Christ’s law)  , so as to win those not having the law .
To the weak I became weak , to win the weak . I have become all things to all people so that by all possible means I might save some . 
I do all this for the sake of the gospel , that I may share in its blessings .
Do you not know that in a race all the runners run , but only one gets the prize ? Run in such a way as to get the prize .
Everyone who competes in the games goes into strict training . They do it to get a crown that will not last , but we do it to get a crown that will last forever .
Therefore I do not run like someone running aimlessly ; I do not fight like a boxer beating the air .  
No , I strike a blow to my body and make it my slave so that after I have preached to others , I myself will not be disqualified for the prize .
For I do not want you to be ignorant of the fact , brothers and sisters , that our ancestors were all under the cloud and that they all passed through the sea .
They were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea .
They all ate the same spiritual food 
and drank the same spiritual drink ; for they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them , and that rock was Christ . 
Nevertheless , God was not pleased with most of them ; their bodies were scattered in the wilderness .
Now these things occurred as examples to keep us from setting our hearts on evil things as they did .
Do not be idolaters , as some of them were ; as it is written : “ The people sat down to eat and drink and got up to indulge in revelry . ”
We should not commit sexual immorality , as some of them did—and in one day twenty three thousand of them died .
We should not test Christ , as some of them did — and were killed by snakes . 
And do not grumble , as some of them did — and were killed by the destroying angel .
These things happened to them as examples and were written down as warnings for us , on whom the culmination of the ages has come .
So , if you think you are standing firm , be careful that you don’t fall ! 
No temptation has overtaken you except what is common to mankind . And God is faithful ; he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear . But when you are tempted , he will also provide a way out so that you can endure it .
Therefore , my dear friends , flee from idolatry .
I speak to sensible people ; judge for yourselves what I say . 
Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of Christ ? And is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of Christ ? 
Because there is one loaf , we , who are many , are one body , for we all share the one loaf .
Consider the people of Israel : Do not those who eat the sacrifices participate in the altar ? 
Do I mean then that food sacrificed to an idol is anything , or that an idol is anything ?
No , but the sacrifices of pagans are offered to demons , not to God , and I do not want you to be participants with demons .
You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons too ; you cannot have a part in both the Lord’s table and the table of demons . 
Are we trying to arouse the Lord’s jealousy ? Are we stronger than he ?
“ I have the right to do anything , ” you say — but not everything is beneficial . “ I have the right to do anything ” — but not everything is constructive . 
No one should seek their own good , but the good of others .
Eat anything sold in the meat market without raising questions of conscience , 
for , “ The earth is the Lord’s , and everything in it . ”
If an unbeliever invites you to a meal and you want to go , eat whatever is put before you without raising questions of conscience . 
But if someone says to you , “ This has been offered in sacrifice , ” then do not eat it , both for the sake of the one who told you and for the sake of conscience . 
I am referring to the other person’s conscience , not yours . For why is my freedom being judged by another’s conscience ? 
If I take part in the meal with thankfulness , why am I denounced because of something I thank God for ?
So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do , do it all for the glory of God .
Do not cause anyone to stumble, whether Jews , Greeks or the church of God — 
even as I try to please everyone in every way . For I am not seeking my own good but the good of many , so that they may be saved .
Follow my example, as I follow the example of Christ .
I praise you for remembering me in everything and for holding to the traditions just as I passed them on to you .
But I want you to realize that the head of every man is Christ , and the head of the woman is man , and the head of Christ is God . 
Every man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head .
But every woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her head — it is the same as having her head shaved . 
For if a woman does not cover her head , she might as well have her hair cut off ; but if it is a disgrace for a woman to have her hair cut off or her head shaved , then she should cover her head .
A man ought not to cover his head , since he is the image and glory of God ; but woman is the glory of man .
For man did not come from woman , but woman from man ;
neither was man created for woman, but woman for man .
It is for this reason that a woman ought to have authority over her own head , because of the angels .
Nevertheless , in the Lord woman is not independent of man , nor is man independent of woman . 
For as woman came from man , so also man is born of woman . But everything comes from God .
Judge for yourselves : Is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered ?
Does not the very nature of things teach you that if a man has long hair , it is a disgrace to him ,
but that if a woman has long hair , it is her glory ? For long hair is given to her as a covering . 
If anyone wants to be contentious about this , we have no other practice — nor do the churches of God .
In the following directives I have no praise for you , for your meetings do more harm than good . 
In the first place , I hear that when you come together as a church , there are divisions among you , and to some extent I believe it .
No doubt there have to be differences among you to show which of you have God’s approval . 
So then , when you come together , it is not the Lord’s Supper you eat ,
for when you are eating , some of you go ahead with your own private suppers. As a result , one person remains hungry and another gets drunk . 
Don’t you have homes to eat and drink in ? Or do you despise the church of God by humiliating those who have nothing ? What shall I say to you ? Shall I praise you ? Certainly not in this matter !
For I received from the Lord what I also passed on to you : The Lord Jesus , on the night he was betrayed , took bread ,
and when he had given thanks , he broke it and said , “ This is my body , which is for you ; do this in remembrance of me . ”
In the same way , after supper he took the cup , saying , “ This cup is the new covenant in my blood ; do this , whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me . ” 
For whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup , you proclaim the Lord’s death until he comes .
So then , whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the Lord .
Everyone ought to examine themselves before they eat of the bread and drink from the cup . 
For those who eat and drink without discerning the body of Christ eat and drink judgment on themselves . 
That is why many among you are weak and sick , and a number of you have fallen asleep . 
But if we were more discerning with regard to ourselves , we would not come under such judgment . 
Nevertheless , when we are judged in this way by the Lord , we are being disciplined so that we will not be finally condemned with the world .
So then , my brothers and sisters , when you gather to eat , you should all eat together . 
Anyone who is hungry should eat something at home , so that when you meet together it may not result in judgment . And when I come I will give further directions .
Now about the gifts of the Spirit , brothers and sisters , I do not want you to be uninformed  . 
You know that when you were pagans , somehow or other you were influenced and led astray to mute idols . 
Therefore I want you to know that no one who is speaking by the Spirit of God says , “ Jesus be cursed , ” and no one can say , “ Jesus is Lord , ” except by the Holy Spirit .
There are different kinds of gifts , but the same Spirit distributes them .
There are different kinds of service , but the same Lord . 
There are different kinds of working , but in all of them and in everyone it is the same God at work .
Now to each one the manifestation of the Spirit is given for the common good . 
To one there is given through the Spirit a message of wisdom , to another a message of knowledge by means of the same Spirit , 
to another faith by the same Spirit , to another gifts of healing by that one Spirit , 
to another miraculous powers , to another prophecy , to another distinguishing between spirits , to another speaking in different kinds of tongues , and to still another the interpretation of tongues .
All these are the work of one and the same Spirit , and he distributes them to each one , just as he determines .
Just as a body , though one , has many parts , but all its many parts form one body , so it is with Christ . 
For we were all baptized by one Spirit so as to form one body — whether Jews or Gentiles , slave or free — and we were all given the one Spirit to drink . 
Even so the body is not made up of one part but of many .
Now if the foot should say , “ Because I am not a hand , I do not belong to the body , ” it would not for that reason stop being part of the body .
And if the ear should say , “ Because I am not an eye , I do not belong to the body , ” it would not for that reason stop being part of the body .
If the whole body were an eye , where would the sense of hearing be ? If the whole body were an ear , where would the sense of smell be ? 
But in fact God has placed the parts in the body , every one of them , just as he wanted them to be . 
If they were all one part , where would the body be ? 
As it is , there are many parts , but one body .
The eye cannot say to the hand , “ I don’t need you ! ” And the head cannot say to the feet , “ I don’t need you ! ”
On the contrary , those parts of the body that seem to be weaker are indispensable , 
and the parts that we think are less honorable we treat with special honor . And the parts that are unpresentable are treated with special modesty ,
while our presentable parts need no special treatment . But God has put the body together , giving greater honor to the parts that lacked it , 
so that there should be no division in the body , but that its parts should have equal concern for each other . 
If one part suffers , every part suffers with it ; if one part is honored , every part rejoices with it .
Now you are the body of Christ , and each one of you is a part of it . 
And God has placed in the church first of all apostles , second prophets , third teachers , then miracles , then gifts of healing , of helping , of guidance , and of different kinds of tongues . 
Are all apostles ? Are all prophets ? Are all teachers ? Do all work miracles ? 
Do all have gifts of healing ? Do all speak in tongues ? Do all interpret ? 
Now eagerly desire the greater gifts . And yet I will show you the most excellent way .
If I speak in the tongues of men or of angels , but do not have love , I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal . 
If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge , and if I have a faith that can move mountains , but do not have love , I am nothing . 
If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that I may boast , but do not have love , I gain nothing .
Love is patient , love is kind . It does not envy , it does not boast , it is not proud .
It does not dishonor others , it is not self-seeking , it is not easily angered , it keeps no record of wrongs . 
Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth . 
It always protects , always trusts , always hopes , always perseveres .
Love never fails . But where there are prophecies , they will cease ; where there are tongues , they will be stilled ; where there is knowledge , it will pass away . 
For we know in part and we prophesy in part , 
but when completeness comes , what is in part disappears . 
When I was a child , I talked like a child , I thought like a child , I reasoned like a child . When I became a man , I put the ways of childhood behind me . 
For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror ; then we shall see face to face . Now I know in part ; then I shall know fully , even as I am fully known .
And now these three remain : faith , hope and love . But the greatest of these is love .
Follow the way of love and eagerly desire gifts of the Spirit , especially prophecy .
For anyone who speaks in a tongue does not speak to people but to God . Indeed , no one understands them ; they utter mysteries by the Spirit . 
But the one who prophesies speaks to people for their strengthening , encouraging and comfort . 
Anyone who speaks in a tongue edifies themselves , but the one who prophesies edifies the church . 
I would like every one of you to speak in tongues , but I would rather have you prophesy . The one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks in tongues , unless someone interprets , so that the church may be edified .
Now , brothers and sisters , if I come to you and speak in tongues , what good will I be to you , unless I bring you some revelation or knowledge or prophecy or word of instruction ? 
Even in the case of lifeless things that make sounds , such as the pipe or harp , how will anyone know what tune is being played unless there is a distinction in the notes ?
Again , if the trumpet does not sound a clear call , who will get ready for battle ?
So it is with you . Unless you speak intelligible words with your tongue , how will anyone know what you are saying ? You will just be speaking into the air . 
Undoubtedly there are all sorts of languages in the world , yet none of them is without meaning . 
If then I do not grasp the meaning of what someone is saying , I am a foreigner to the speaker , and the speaker is a foreigner to me . 
So it is with you . Since you are eager for gifts of the Spirit , try to excel in those that build up the church .
For this reason the one who speaks in a tongue should pray that they may interpret what they say .
For if I pray in a tongue , my spirit prays , but my mind is unfruitful . 
So what shall I do ? I will pray with my spirit , but I will also pray with my understanding ; I will sing with my spirit , but I will also sing with my understanding .
Otherwise when you are praising God in the Spirit , how can someone else , who is now put in the position of an inquirer , say “ Amen ” to your thanksgiving , since they do not know what you are saying ? 
You are giving thanks well enough , but no one else is edified .
I thank God that I speak in tongues more than all of you . 
But in the church I would rather speak five intelligible words to instruct others than ten thousand words in a tongue .
Brothers and sisters , stop thinking like children . In regard to evil be infants , but in your thinking be adults . 
In the Law it is written : “ With other tongues and through the lips of foreigners I will speak to this people , but even then they will not listen to me , says the Lord . ”
Tongues , then , are a sign , not for believers but for unbelievers ; prophecy , however , is not for unbelievers but for believers .
So if the whole church comes together and everyone speaks in tongues , and inquirers or unbelievers come in , will they not say that you are out of your mind ?
But if an unbeliever or an inquirer comes in while everyone is prophesying , they are convicted of sin and are brought under judgment by all , 
as the secrets of their hearts are laid bare . So they will fall down and worship God , exclaiming , “ God is really among you ! ”
What then shall we say , brothers and sisters ? When you come together , each of you has a hymn , or a word of instruction , a revelation , a tongue or an interpretation . Everything must be done so that the church may be built up .
If anyone speaks in a tongue , two—or at the most three — should speak , one at a time , and someone must interpret . 
If there is no interpreter , the speaker should keep quiet in the church and speak to himself and to God .
Two or three prophets should speak , and the others should weigh carefully what is said . 
And if a revelation comes to someone who is sitting down , the first speaker should stop . 
For you can all prophesy in turn so that everyone may be instructed and encouraged . 
The spirits of prophets are subject to the control of prophets . 
For God is not a God of disorder but of peace — as in all the congregations of the Lord’s people .
Women should remain silent in the churches . They are not allowed to speak , but must be in submission , as the law says . 
If they want to inquire about something , they should ask their own husbands at home ; for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in the church .
Or did the word of God originate with you ? Or are you the only people it has reached ?
If anyone thinks they are a prophet or otherwise gifted by the Spirit , let them acknowledge that what I am writing to you is the Lord’s command . 
But if anyone ignores this , they will themselves be ignored .
Therefore , my brothers and sisters , be eager to prophesy , and do not forbid speaking in tongues . 
But everything should be done in a fitting and orderly way .
Now I am going to make clear to you , my brothers , what the good news was which I gave to you , and which you took , and on which your faith is based ,
By which you have salvation ; that is to say , the form in which it was given to you , if it is fixed in your minds , and if your faith in it is not without effect .
For I gave to you first of all what was handed down to me , how Christ underwent death for our sins , as it says in the Writings ;
And he was put in the place of the dead ; and on the third day he came back from the dead , as it says in the Writings ;
And he was seen by Cephas ; then by the twelve ;
Then by more than five hundred brothers at the same time , most of whom are still living , but some are sleeping ;
Then he was seen by James ; then by all the Apostles .
And last of all , as by one whose birth was out of the right time , he was seen by me .
For I am the least of the Apostles , having no right to be named an Apostle , because of my cruel attacks on the church of God .
But by the grace of God , I am what I am : and his grace which was given to me has not been for nothing ; for I did more work than all of them ; though not I , but the grace of God which was with me .
If then it is I who am the preacher , or they , this is our word , and to this you have given your faith .
Now if the good news says that Christ came back from the dead , how do some of you say that there is no coming back from the dead ?
But if there is no coming back from the dead , then Christ has not come back from the dead :
And if Christ did not come again from the dead , then our good news and your faith in it are of no effect .
Yes , and we are seen to be false witnesses of God ; because we gave witness of God that by his power Christ came again from the dead : which is not true if there is no coming back from the dead .
For if it is not possible for the dead to come to life again , then Christ has not come to life again :
And if that is so , your faith is of no effect ; you are still in your sins .
And , in addition , the dead in Christ have gone to destruction .
If in this life only we have hope in Christ , we are of all men most unhappy .
But now Christ has truly come back from the dead , the first-fruits of those who are sleeping .
For as by man came death , so by man there is a coming back from the dead .
For as in Adam death comes to all , so in Christ will all come back to life .
But every man in his right order : Christ the first-fruits ; then those who are Christ's at his coming .
Then comes the end , when he will give up the kingdom to God , even the Father ; when he will have put an end to all rule and to all authority and power .
For his rule will go on till he has put all those who are against him under his feet .
The last power to come to an end is death .
For , as it says , He has put all things under his feet . But when he says , All things are put under him , it is clear that it is not said about him who put all things under him .
And when all things have been put under him , then will the Son himself be under him who put all things under him , so that God may be all in all .
Again , what will they do who are given baptism for the dead ? if the dead do not come back at all , why are people given baptism for them ?
And why are we in danger every hour ?
Yes , truly , by your pride in me , my brothers in Christ Jesus our Lord , my life is one long death .
If , after the way of men , I was fighting with beasts at Ephesus , what profit is it to me ? If the dead do not come to life again , let us take our pleasure in feasting , for tomorrow we come to an end .
Do not be tricked by false words : evil company does damage to good behaviour .
Be awake to righteousness and keep yourselves from sin ; for some have no knowledge of God : I say this to put you to shame .
But someone will say , How do the dead come back ? and with what sort of body do they come ?
Foolish man , it is necessary for the seed which you put into the earth to undergo death in order that it may come to life again :
And when you put it into the earth , you do not put in the body which it will be , but only the seed , of grain or some other sort of plant ;
But God gives it a body , as it is pleasing to him , and to every seed its special body .
All flesh is not the same flesh : but there is one flesh of men , another of beasts , another of birds , and another of fishes .
And there are bodies of heaven and bodies of earth , but the glory of the one is different from that of the other .
There is one glory of the sun , and another glory of the moon , and another glory of the stars ; for the glory of one star is different from that of another .
So is it with the coming back from the dead . It is planted in death ; it comes again in life :
It is planted in shame ; it comes again in glory : feeble when it is planted , it comes again in power :
It is planted a natural body ; it comes again as a body of the spirit . If there is a natural body , there is equally a body of the spirit .
And so it is said , The first man Adam was a living soul . The last Adam is a life-giving spirit .
But that which is natural comes before that which is of the spirit .
The first man is from the earth , and of the earth : the second man is from heaven .
Those who are of the earth are like the man who was from the earth : and those who are of heaven are like the one from heaven .
And in the same way as we have taken on us the image of the man from the earth , so we will take on us the image of the one from heaven .
Now I say this , my brothers , that it is not possible for flesh and blood to have a part in the kingdom of God ; and death may not have a part in life .
See , I am giving you the revelation of a secret : we will not all come to the sleep of death , but we will all be changed .
In a second , in the shutting of an eye , at the sound of the last horn : for at that sound the dead will come again , free for ever from the power of death , and we will be changed .
For this body which comes to destruction will be made free from the power of death , and the man who is under the power of death will put on eternal life .
But when this has taken place , then that which was said in the Writings will come true , Death is overcome by life .
O death , where is your power ? O death , where are your pains ?
The pain of death is sin ; and the power of sin is the law :
But praise be to God who gives us strength to overcome through our Lord Jesus Christ .
For this cause , my dear brothers , be strong in purpose and unmoved , ever giving yourselves to the work of the Lord , because you are certain that your work is not without effect in the Lord .
Now about the giving of money for the saints , as I gave orders to the churches of Galatia , so do you .
On the first day of the week , let every one of you put by him in store , in measure as he has done well in business , so that it may not be necessary to get money together when I come .
And when I come , I will send the men of your selection with letters to take the money you have got together to Jerusalem .
And if it is possible for me to go there , they will go with me .
But I will come to you after I have gone through Macedonia , for that is my purpose ;
But I may be with you for a time , or even for the winter , so that you may see me on my way , wherever I go .
For it is not my desire to see you now , on my way ; because it is my hope to be with you for some time , if that is the Lord's pleasure .
But I will be at Ephesus till Pentecost ;
For a great and important door there is open to me , and there are a number of people against me .
Now if Timothy comes , see that he is with you without fear ; because he is doing the Lord's work , even as I am :
See then that he has the honour which is right . But send him on his way in peace , so that he may come to me : for I am looking for him with the brothers .
But as for Apollos , the brother , I had a great desire for him to come to you with the brothers , but it was not his pleasure to come now ; but he will come when he has a chance .
Be on the watch , unmoved in the faith , and be strong like men .
Let all you do be done in love .
Now I make my request to you , my brothers , for you have knowledge that the house of Stephanas is the first-fruits of Achaia , and that they have made themselves the servants of the saints ,
That you put yourselves under such , and under everyone who is helping the Lord's work .
And I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus : for they have done what was needed to make your work complete .
For they gave comfort to my spirit and to yours : for which cause give respect to such people .
The churches of Asia send their love to you . So do Aquila and Prisca , with the church which is in their house .
All the brothers send their love to you . Give one another a holy kiss .
I , Paul , send you these words of love in my writing .
If any man has not love for the Lord , let him be cursed . Maran atha (our Lord comes) .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you .
My love be with you all in Christ Jesus . So be it .
Paul , an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the purpose of God , and Timothy the brother , to the church of God which is in Corinth , with all the saints who are in all Achaia :
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort ;
Who gives us comfort in all our troubles , so that we may be able to give comfort to others who are in trouble , through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God .
For as we undergo more of the pain which Christ underwent , so through Christ does our comfort become greater .
But if we are troubled , it is for your comfort and salvation ; or if we are comforted , it is for your comfort , which takes effect through your quiet undergoing of the same troubles which we undergo :
And our hope for you is certain ; in the knowledge that as you take part in the troubles , so you will take part in the comfort .
For it is our desire that you may not be without knowledge of our trouble which came on us in Asia , that the weight of it was very great , more than our power , so that it seemed that we had no hope even of life :
Yes , we ourselves have had the answer of death in ourselves , so that our hope might not be in ourselves , but in God who is able to give life to the dead :
Who gave us salvation from so great a death : on whom we have put our hope that he will still go on to give us salvation ;
You at the same time helping together by your prayer for us ; so that for what has been given to us through a number of persons , praise may go up to God for us from all of them .
For our glory is in this , in the knowledge which we have that our way of life in the world , and most of all in relation to you , has been holy and true in the eyes of God ; not in the wisdom of the flesh , but in the grace of God .
For in our letters we say no other things to you , but those which you are reading , and to which you give agreement , and , it is my hope , will go on doing so to the end :
Even as you have been ready , in part , to say that we are your glory , in the same way that you are ours , in the day of the Lord Jesus .
And being certain of this , it was my purpose to come to you before , so that you might have a second grace ;
And by way of Corinth to go into Macedonia , and from there to come back again to you , so that you might send me on my way to Judaea .
If then I had such a purpose , did I seem to be changing suddenly ? or am I guided in my purposes by the flesh , saying , Yes , today , and , No , tomorrow ?
As God is true , our word to you is not Yes and No .
For the Son of God , Jesus Christ , whom we were preaching among you , even I and Silvanus and Timothy , was not Yes and No , but in him is Yes .
For he is the Yes to all the undertakings of God : and by him all the words of God are made certain and put into effect , to the glory of God through us .
Now he who makes our faith strong together with you , in Christ , and has given us of his grace , is God ;
And it is he who has put his stamp on us , even the Spirit , as the sign in our hearts of the coming glory .
But God is my witness that it was in pity for you that I did not come to Corinth at that time .
Not that we have authority over your faith , but we are helpers of your joy : for it is faith which is your support .
But it was my decision for myself , not to come again to you with sorrow .
For if I give you sorrow , who then will make me glad , but he who is made sad by me ?
And I said this very thing in my letter , for fear that when I came I might have sorrow from those from whom it was right for me to have joy ; being certain of this , that my joy is the joy of you all .
For out of much trouble and pain of heart and much weeping I sent my letter to you ; not to give you sorrow , but so that you might see how great is the love which I have to you .
But if anyone has been a cause of sorrow , he has been so , not to me only , but in some measure to all of you (I say this that I may not be over-hard on you) .
Let it be enough for such a man to have undergone the punishment which the church put on him ;
So that now , on the other hand , it is right for him to have forgiveness and comfort from you , for fear that his sorrow may be over-great .
For which cause my desire is that you will make your love to him clear by your acts .
And for the same reason I sent you a letter so that I might be certain of your desire to do my orders in all things .
But if you give forgiveness to anyone , I do the same : for if I have given forgiveness for anything , I have done it because of you , in the person of Christ ;
So that Satan may not get the better of us : for we are not without knowledge of his designs .
Now when I came to Troas for the good news of Christ , and there was an open door for me in the Lord ,
I had no rest in my spirit because Titus my brother was not there : so I went away from them , and came into Macedonia .
But praise be to God who makes us strong to overcome in Christ , and makes clear through us in every place the value of the knowledge of him .
For we are a sweet perfume of Christ to God in those who are getting salvation and in those who are going to destruction ;
To the one it is a perfume of death to death ; to the other a perfume of life to life . And who is enough for such things ?
For we are not like the great number who make use of the word of God for profit : but our words are true , as from God , being said as before God in Christ .
Do we seem to be again attempting to put ourselves in the right ? or have we need , as some have , of letters of approval to you or from you ?
You yourselves are our letter , whose writing is in our heart , open for every man's reading and knowledge ;
For you are clearly a letter of Christ , the fruit of our work , recorded not with ink , but with the Spirit of the living God ; not in stone , but in hearts of flesh .
And this is the certain faith which we have in God through Christ :
Not as if we were able by ourselves to do anything for which we might take the credit ; but our power comes from God ;
Who has made us able to be servants of a new agreement ; not of the letter , but of the Spirit : for the letter gives death , but the Spirit gives life .
For if the operation of the law , giving death , recorded in letters on stone , came with glory , so that the eyes of the children of Israel had to be turned away from the face of Moses because of its glory , a glory which was only for a time :
Will not the operation of the Spirit have a much greater glory ?
For if the operation of the law , producing punishment , had its glory , how much greater will be the operation of the Spirit causing righteousness ?
For the glory of the first no longer seems to be glory , because of the greater glory of that which comes after .
For if the order which was for a time had its glory , much more will the eternal order have its glory .
Having then such a hope , we keep nothing back ,
And are not like Moses , who put a veil on his face , so that the children of Israel might not see clearly to the end of the present order of things :
But their minds were made hard : for to this very day at the reading of the old agreement the same veil is still unlifted ; though it is taken away in Christ .
But to this day , at the reading of the law of Moses , a veil is over their heart .
But when it is turned to the Lord , the veil will be taken away .
Now the Lord is the Spirit : and where the Spirit of the Lord is , there the heart is free .
But we all , with unveiled face giving back as in a glass the glory of the Lord , are changed into the same image from glory to glory , even as from the Lord who is the Spirit .
For this reason , because we have been made servants of this new order , through the mercy given to us , we are strong :
And we have given up the secret things of shame , not walking in false ways , and not making use of the word of God with deceit ; but by the revelation of what is true , as before God , we have the approval of every man's sense of right and wrong .
But if our good news is veiled , it is veiled from those who are on the way to destruction :
Because the god of this world has made blind the minds of those who have not faith , so that the light of the good news of the glory of Christ , who is the image of God , might not be shining on them .
For our preaching is not about ourselves , but about Christ Jesus as Lord , and ourselves as your servants through Jesus .
Seeing that it is God who said , Let light be shining out of the dark , who has put in our hearts the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ .
But we have this wealth in vessels of earth , so that it may be seen that the power comes not from us but from God ;
Troubles are round us on every side , but we are not shut in ; things are hard for us , but we see a way out of them ;
We are cruelly attacked , but not without hope ; we are made low , but we are not without help ;
In our bodies there is ever the mark of the death of Jesus , so that the life of Jesus may be seen in our bodies .
For , while living , we are still being given up to death because of Jesus , so that the life of Jesus may be seen in our flesh , though it is under the power of death .
So then , death is working in us , but life in you .
But having the same spirit of faith , as it is said in the Writings , The words of my mouth came from the faith in my heart ; in the same way , our words are the outcome of our faith ;
Because we are certain that he who made the Lord Jesus come back from the dead , will do the same for us , and will give us a place in his glory with you .
For we go through all things on account of you , because the greater the number to whom the grace is given , the greater is the praise to the glory of God .
For which cause we do not give way to weariness ; but though our outer man is getting feebler , our inner man is made new day by day .
For our present trouble , which is only for a short time , is working out for us a much greater weight of glory ;
While our minds are not on the things which are seen , but on the things which are not seen : for the things which are seen are for a time ; but the things which are not seen are eternal .
For we are conscious that if this our tent of flesh is taken down , we have a building from God , a house not made with hands , eternal , in heaven .
For in this we are crying in weariness , greatly desiring to be clothed with our house from heaven :
So that our spirits may not be unclothed .
For truly , we who are in this tent do give out cries of weariness , for the weight of care which is on us ; not because we are desiring to be free from the body , but so that we may have our new body , and death may be overcome by life .
Now he who has made us for this very thing is God , who has given us the Spirit as a witness of what is to come .
So , then , we are ever without fear , and though conscious that while we are in the body we are away from the Lord ,
(For we are walking by faith , not by seeing ,)
We are without fear , desiring to be free from the body , and to be with the Lord .
For this reason we make it our purpose , in the body or away from it , to be well-pleasing to him .
For we all have to come before Christ to be judged ; so that every one of us may get his reward for the things done in the body , good or bad .
Having in mind , then , the fear of the Lord , we put these things before men , but God sees our hearts ; and it is my hope that we may seem right in your eyes .
We are not again requesting your approval , but we are giving you the chance of taking pride in us , so that you may be able to give an answer to those whose glory is in seeming , and not in the heart .
For if we are foolish , it is to God ; or if we are serious , it is for you .
For it is the love of Christ which is moving us ; because we are of the opinion that if one was put to death for all , then all have undergone death ;
And that he underwent death for all , so that the living might no longer be living to themselves , but to him who underwent death for them and came back from the dead .
For this reason , from this time forward we have knowledge of no man after the flesh : even if we have had knowledge of Christ after the flesh , we have no longer any such knowledge .
So if any man is in Christ , he is in a new world : the old things have come to an end ; they have truly become new .
But all things are of God , who has made us at peace with himself through Christ , and has given to us the work of making peace ;
That is , that God was in Christ making peace between the world and himself , not putting their sins to their account , and having given to us the preaching of this news of peace .
So we are the representatives of Christ , as if God was making a request to you through us : we make our request to you , in the name of Christ , be at peace with God .
For him who had no knowledge of sin God made to be sin for us ; so that we might become the righteousness of God in him .
We then , working together with God , make our request to you not to take the grace of God to no purpose .
(For he says , I have given ear to you at a good time , and I have been your helper in a day of salvation : see , now is the good time ; now is the day of salvation) :
Giving no cause for trouble in anything , so that no one may be able to say anything against our work ;
But in everything making it clear that we are the servants of God , in quiet strength , in troubles , in need , in sorrow ,
In blows , in prisons , in attacks , in hard work , in watchings , in going without food ;
In a clean heart , in knowledge , in long waiting , in being kind , in the Holy Spirit , in true love ,
In the true word , in the power of God ; with the arms of righteousness on the right hand and on the left ,
By glory and by shame , by an evil name and a good name ; as untrue , and still true ;
Unnoted , but still kept fully in mind ; as near to death , but still living ; as undergoing punishment , but not put to death ;
As full of sorrow , but ever glad ; as poor , but giving wealth to others ; as having nothing , but still having all things .
Our mouth is open to you , O Corinthians , our heart is wide .
It is not our feelings to you which are narrow , but yours to us .
Now to give me back payment of the same sort (I am talking as to my children) , let your hearts be wide open to me .
Do not keep company with those who have not faith : for what is there in common between righteousness and evil , or between light and dark ?
And what agreement is there between Christ and the Evil One ? or what part has one who has faith with one who has not ?
And what agreement has the house of God with images ? for we are a house of the living God ; even as God has said , I will be living among them , and walking with them ; and I will be their God , and they will be my people .
For which cause , Come out from among them , and be separate , says the Lord , and let no unclean thing come near you ; and I will take you for myself ,
And will be a Father to you ; and you will be my sons and daughters , says the Lord , the Ruler of all .
Because God , then , will give us such rewards , dear brothers , let us make ourselves clean from all evil of flesh and spirit , and become completely holy in the fear of God .
Let your hearts be open to us : we have done no man wrong , no man has been damaged by us , we have made no profit out of any man ,
It is not with the purpose of judging you that I say this : for I have said before that you are in our hearts for life and death together .
My words to you are without fear , I am full of pride on account of you : I have great comfort and joy in all our troubles .
For even when we had come into Macedonia our flesh had no rest , but we were troubled on every side ; there were fightings outside and fears inside .
But God who gives comfort to the poor in spirit gave us comfort by the coming of Titus ;
And not by his coming only , but by the comfort which he had in you , while he gave us word of your desire , your sorrow , your care for me ; so that I was still more glad .
For though my letter gave you pain , I have no regret for it now , though I had before ; for I see that the letter gave you pain , but only for a time .
Now I am glad , not that you had sorrow , but that your sorrow was the cause of a change of heart ; for yours was a holy sorrow so that you might undergo no loss by us in anything .
For the sorrow which God gives is the cause of salvation through a change of heart , in which there is no reason for grief : but the sorrow of the world is a cause of death .
For you see what care was produced in you by this very sorrow of yours before God , what clearing of yourselves , what wrath against sin , what fear , what desire , what serious purpose , what punishment . In everything you have made it clear that you are free from sin in this business .
So though I sent you a letter , it was not only because of the man who did the wrong , or because of him to whom the wrong was done , but so that your true care for us might be made clear in the eyes of God .
So we have been comforted : and we had the greater joy in our comfort because of the joy of Titus , for his spirit had been made glad by you all .
For I was not put to shame in anything in which I may have made clear to him my pride in you ; but as we said nothing to you but what was true , so the good things which I said to Titus about you were seen by him to be true .
And his love to you is the more increased by his memory of you all , how you gave way to his authority , and how you took him to your hearts with fear and honour .
It gives me great joy to see you answering to my good opinion of you in every way .
And now we give you news , brothers , about the grace of God which has been given to the churches of Macedonia ;
How while they were undergoing every sort of trouble , and were in the greatest need , they took all the greater joy in being able to give freely to the needs of others .
For I give them witness , that as they were able , and even more than they were able , they gave from the impulse of their hearts ,
Seriously requesting us that they might have a part in this grace of being servants to the needs of the saints :
And going even farther than our hope , they first gave themselves to the Lord and to us after the purpose of God .
So that we made a request to Titus that , as he had made a start before , so he might make this grace complete in you .
And that as you are full of every good thing , of faith , of the word , of knowledge , of a ready mind , and of love to us , so you may be full of this grace in the same way .
I am not giving you an order , but using the ready mind of others as a test of the quality of your love .
For you see the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , how though he had wealth , he became poor on your account , so that through his need you might have wealth .
And in this I give my opinion : for it is to your profit , who were the first to make a start a year before , not only to do this , but to make clear that your minds were more than ready to do it .
Then make the doing of it complete ; so that as you had a ready mind , you may give effect to it as you are able .
For if there is a ready mind , a man will have God's approval in the measure of what he has , and not of what he has not .
And I am not saying this so that others may get off free , while the weight comes on you :
But so that things may be equal ; that from those things of which you have more than enough at the present time their need may be helped , and that if you are in any need they may be a help to you in the same way , making things equal .
As it says in the Writings , He who had taken up much had nothing over and he who had little had enough .
But praise be to God , who puts the same care for you into the heart of Titus .
For while he gladly gave ear to our request , he was interested enough to go to you from the impulse of his heart .
And with him we have sent a brother whose praise in the good news has gone through all the churches ;
And not only so , but he was marked out by the churches to go with us in the grace of this giving which we have undertaken to the glory of the Lord and to make clear that our mind was ready :
And so that no man might be able to say anything against us in the business of this giving which has been put into our hands :
For the business has been so ordered by us as to have the approval , not only of the Lord , but of men .
And we have sent with them our brother , whose ready spirit has been made clear to us at times and in ways without number , but it is now all the more so because of the certain faith which he has in you .
If any question comes up about Titus , he is my brother-worker , working with me for you ; or about the others , they are the representatives of the churches to the glory of Christ .
Make clear then to them , as representatives of the churches , the quality of your love , and that the things which we have said about you are true .
But there is no need for me to say anything in my letter about the giving to the saints :
For I have before made clear to those of Macedonia my pride in your ready mind , saying to them that Achaia has been ready for a year back ; and a great number have been moved to do the same by your example .
But I have sent the brothers , so that the good things we said about you may be seen to be true , and that , as I said , you may be ready :
For fear that , if any from Macedonia come with me , and you are not ready , we (not to say , you) might be put to shame in this thing .
So it seemed to me wise for the brothers to go before , and see that the amount which you had undertaken to give was ready , so that it might be a cause for praise , and not as if we were making profit out of you .
But in the Writings it says , He who puts in only a small number of seeds , will get in the same ; and he who puts them in from a full hand , will have produce in full measure from them .
Let every man do after the purpose of his heart ; not giving with grief , or by force : for God takes pleasure in a ready giver .
And God is able to give you all grace in full measure ; so that ever having enough of all things , you may be full of every good work :
As it is said in the Writings , He has sent out far and wide , he has given to the poor ; his righteousness is for ever .
And he who gives seed for putting into the field and bread for food , will take care of the growth of your seed , at the same time increasing the fruits of your righteousness ;
Your wealth being increased in everything , with a simple mind , causing praise to God through us .
For this work of giving not only takes care of the needs of the saints , but is the cause of much praise to God ;
For when , through this work of giving , they see what you are , they give glory to God for the way in which you have given yourselves to the good news of Christ , and for the wealth of your giving to them and to all ;
While their hearts go out to you in love and in prayer for you , because of the great grace of God which is in you .
Praise be to God for what he has given , which words have no power to say .
Now I , Paul , myself make request to you by the quiet and gentle behaviour of Christ , I who am poor in spirit when with you , but who say what is in my mind to you without fear when I am away from you :
Yes , I make my request to you , so that when I am with you I may not have to make use of the authority which may be needed against some to whom we seem to be walking after the flesh .
For though we may be living in the flesh , we are not fighting after the way of the flesh
(For the arms with which we are fighting are not those of the flesh , but are strong before God for the destruction of high places) ;
Putting an end to reasonings , and every high thing which is lifted up against the knowledge of God , and causing every thought to come under the authority of Christ ;
Being ready to give punishment to whatever is against his authority , after you have made it clear that you are completely under his control .
Give attention to the things which are before you . If any man seems to himself to be Christ's , let him keep in mind that we are as much Christ's as he is .
For though I might take pride in our authority (which the Lord gave for building you up , and not for your destruction) , it will not be a cause of shame to me :
That I may not seem to have the desire of causing you fear by my letters .
For his letters , they say , have weight and are strong ; but in body he is feeble , and his way of talking has little force .
Let those who say this keep in mind that , what we are in word by letters when we are away , so will we be in act when we are present .
For we will not make comparison of ourselves with some of those who say good things about themselves : but these , measuring themselves by themselves , and making comparison of themselves with themselves , are not wise .
We will not give glory to ourselves in over-great measure , but after the measure of the rule which God has given us , a measure which comes even to you .
For we have no need to make ourselves seem more than we are , as if our authority did not come as far as to you : for we came even as far as you with the good news of Christ :
Not taking credit to ourselves for what is not our business , that is , for the work of others ; but having hope that , with the growth of your faith , we may get the credit for an increase which is the effect of our work ,
So that we may be able to go on and take the good news to countries still farther away than you are , and not take credit for another man's work in making things ready to our hand .
But whoever has a desire for glory , let his glory be in the Lord .
For the Lord's approval of a man is not dependent on his opinion of himself , but on the Lord's opinion of him .
Put up with me if I am a little foolish : but , truly , you do put up with me .
For I have a very great care for you : because you have been married by me to one husband , and it is my desire to give you completely holy to Christ .
But I have a fear , that in some way , as Eve was tricked by the deceit of the snake , your minds may be turned away from their simple and holy love for Christ .
For if anyone comes preaching another Jesus from the one whose preachers we are , or if you have got a different spirit , or a different sort of good news from those which came to you , how well you put up with these things .
For in my opinion , I am in no way less than the most important of the Apostles .
But though I am rough in my way of talking , I am not so in knowledge , as we have made clear to all by our acts among you .
Or did I do wrong in making myself low so that you might be lifted up , because I gave you the good news of God without reward ?
I took money from other churches as payment for my work , so that I might be your servant ;
And when I was present with you , and was in need , I let no man be responsible for me ; for the brothers , when they came from Macedonia , gave me whatever was needed ; and in everything I kept myself from being a trouble to you , and I will go on doing so .
As the true word of Christ is in me , I will let no man take from me this my cause of pride in the country of Achaia .
Why ? because I have no love for you ? let God be judge .
But what I do , that I will go on doing , so that I may give no chance to those who are looking for one ; so that , in the cause of their pride , they may be seen to be the same as we are .
For such men are false Apostles , workers of deceit , making themselves seem like Apostles of Christ .
And it is no wonder ; for even Satan himself is able to take the form of an angel of light .
So it is no great thing if his servants make themselves seem to be servants of righteousness ; whose end will be the reward of their works .
I say again , Let me not seem foolish to anyone ; but if I do , put up with me as such , so that I may take a little glory to myself .
What I am now saying is not by the order of the Lord , but as a foolish person , taking credit to myself , as it seems .
Seeing that there are those who take credit to themselves after the flesh , I will do the same .
For you put up with the foolish gladly , being wise yourselves .
You put up with a man if he makes servants of you , if he makes profit out of you , if he makes you prisoners , if he puts himself in a high place , if he gives you blows on the face .
I say this by way of shaming ourselves , as if we had been feeble . But if anyone puts himself forward (I am talking like a foolish person) , I will do the same .
Are they Hebrews ? so am I . Are they of Israel ? so am I . Are they the seed of Abraham ? so am I .
Are they servants of Christ ? (I am talking foolishly) I am more so ; I have had more experience of hard work , of prisons , of blows more than measure , of death .
Five times the Jews gave me forty blows but one .
Three times I was whipped with rods , once I was stoned , three times the ship I was in came to destruction at sea , a night and a day I have been in the water ;
In frequent travels , in dangers on rivers , in dangers from outlaws , in dangers from my countrymen , in dangers from the Gentiles , in dangers in the town , in dangers in the waste land , in dangers at sea , in dangers among false brothers ;
In hard work and weariness , in frequent watchings , going without food and drink , cold and in need of clothing .
In addition to all the other things , there is that which comes on me every day , the care of all the churches .
Who is feeble and I am not feeble ? who is in danger of falling , and I am not angry ?
If I have to take credit to myself , I will do so in the things in which I am feeble .
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , to whom be praise for ever , is witness that the things which I say are true .
In Damascus , the ruler under Aretas the king kept watch over the town of the people of Damascus , in order to take me :
And being let down in a basket from the wall through a window , I got free from his hands .
As it is necessary for me to take glory to myself , though it is not a good thing , I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord .
I have knowledge of a man in Christ , fourteen years back (if he was in the body , or out of the body , I am not able to say , but God only) , who was taken up to the third heaven .
And I have knowledge of such a man (if he was in the body , or out of the body , I am not able to say , but God only) ,
How he was taken up into Paradise , and words came to his ears which may not be said , and which man is not able to say .
On account of such a one I will have glory : for myself I will take no glory , but only in my feeble body .
For if I had a desire to take credit to myself , it would not be foolish , for I would be saying what is true : but I will not , for fear that I might seem to any man more than he sees me to be , or has word from me that I am .
And because the revelations were so very great , in order that I might not be overmuch lifted up , there was given to me a thorn in the flesh , one sent from Satan to give me pain .
And about this thing I made request to the Lord three times that it might be taken away from me .
And he said to me , My grace is enough for you , for my power is made complete in what is feeble . Most gladly , then , will I take pride in my feeble body , so that the power of Christ may be on me .
So I take pleasure in being feeble , in unkind words , in needs , in cruel attacks , in troubles , on account of Christ : for when I am feeble , then am I strong .
I have been forced by you to become foolish , though it was right for my praise to have come from you : for in no way was I less than the chief of the Apostles , though I am nothing .
Truly the signs of an Apostle were done among you in quiet strength , with wonders and acts of power .
For what is there in which you were made less than the other churches , but in the one thing that I was not a trouble to you ? Let me have forgiveness for this wrong .
This is now the third time that I am ready to come to you ; and I will not be a trouble to you : my desire is for you , not for your property : for it is not the children's business to make store for their fathers , but the fathers for the children .
And I will gladly give all I have for your souls . If I have the more love for you , am I to be loved the less ?
But let it be so , that I was not a trouble to you myself ; but (someone may say) being false , I took you with deceit .
Did I make a profit out of you by any of those whom I sent to you ?
I gave orders to Titus , and I sent the brother with him . Did Titus make any profit out of you ? were we not guided by the same Spirit , in the same ways ?
It may seem to you that all this time we have been attempting to put ourselves in the right ; but we are saying these things before God in Christ . For all things , dear brothers , are for your profit .
For I have a fear that , when I come , you may not be answering to my desire , and that I may not be answering to yours ; that there may be fighting , hate , angry feeling , divisions , evil talk about others , secrets , thoughts of pride , outbursts against authority ;
And that when I come again , my God may put me to shame among you , and I may have grief for those who have done wrong before and have had no regret for their unclean ways , and for the evil desires of the flesh to which they have given way .
This is the third time that I am coming to you . From the mouth of two or three witnesses will every word be made certain .
I said before , and still say it before I come , as being present for the second time , though I am still away from you , to those who have done wrong before , and to all the others , that if I come again I will not have pity ;
Seeing that you are looking for a sign of Christ giving out his word in me ; who is not feeble in relation to you , but is strong in you :
For he was feeble in that he was put to death on the cross , but he is living by the power of God . And we are feeble in him , but we will be living with him through the power of God in relation to you .
Make a test of yourselves , if you are in the faith ; make certain of yourselves . Or are you not conscious in yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you , if you are truly Christ's ?
But it is my hope that you will have no doubt that we are truly Christ's .
Now our prayer to God is that you may do no evil ; not in order that it may be put to our credit , but so that you may do what is right , whatever we may seem .
Because we are able to do nothing against what is true , but only for it .
For we are glad when we are feeble and you are strong : and this is our prayer , even that you may be made complete .
For this cause I am writing these things while I am away , so that there may be need for me , when I am present , to make use of sharp measures , by the authority which the Lord has given me for building up and not for destruction .
Let this be my last word , brothers ; be glad ; be complete ; be comforted ; be of the same mind ; be at peace with one another : and the God of love and peace will be with you .
Give one another a holy kiss .
All the saints send their love to you .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , and the love of God , and the harmony of the Holy Spirit , be with you all .
Luke .
Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us ,
just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word .
With this in mind , since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning , I too decided to write an orderly account for you , most excellent Theophilus , 
so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught .
The Birth of John the Baptist Foretold
In the time of Herod king of Judea there was a priest named Zechariah , who belonged to the priestly division of Abijah ; his wife Elizabeth was also a descendant of Aaron .
Both of them were righteous in the sight of God , observing all the Lord’s commands and decrees blamelessly .
But they were childless because Elizabeth was not able to conceive , and they were both very old .
Once when Zechariah’s division was on duty and he was serving as priest before God ,
he was chosen by lot , according to the custom of the priesthood , to go into the temple of the Lord and burn incense .  
And when the time for the burning of incense came , all the assembled worshipers were praying outside .
Then an angel of the Lord appeared to him , standing at the right side of the altar of incense .
When Zechariah saw him , he was startled and was gripped with fear . 
But the angel said to him : “ Do not be afraid , Zechariah ; your prayer has been heard . Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son , and you are to call him John .
He will be a joy and delight to you , and many will rejoice because of his birth , 
for he will be great in the sight of the Lord . He is never to take wine or other fermented drink , and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit even before he is born .
He will bring back many of the people of Israel to the Lord their God .
And he will go on before the Lord , in the spirit and power of Elijah , to turn the hearts of the parents to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous — to make ready a people prepared for the Lord . ” 
Zechariah asked the angel , “ How can I be sure of this ? I am an old man and my wife is well along in years . ”
The angel said to him , “ I am Gabriel . I stand in the presence of God , and I have been sent to speak to you and to tell you this good news . 
And now you will be silent and not able to speak until the day this happens , because you did not believe my words , which will come true at their appointed time . ”
Meanwhile , the people were waiting for Zechariah and wondering why he stayed so long in the temple . 
When he came out , he could not speak to them . They realized he had seen a vision in the temple , for he kept making signs to them but remained unable to speak .
When his time of service was completed, he returned home .
After this his wife Elizabeth became pregnant and for five months remained in seclusion .
“ The Lord has done this for me,” she said . “ In these days he has shown his favor and taken away my disgrace among the people . ”
The Birth of Jesus Foretold
In the sixth month of Elizabeth’s pregnancy , God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth , a town in Galilee , 
to a virgin pledged to be married to a man named Joseph , a descendant of David . The virgin’s name was Mary .
The angel went to her and said , “ Greetings , you who are highly favored ! The Lord is with you . ”
Mary was greatly troubled at his words and wondered what kind of greeting this might be .
But the angel said to her , “ Do not be afraid , Mary ; you have found favor with God . 
You will conceive and give birth to a son , and you are to call him Jesus .
He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High . The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David ,
and he will reign over Jacob’s descendants forever ; his kingdom will never end . ”
“ How will this be , ” Mary asked the angel , “ since I am a virgin ? ”
The angel answered , “ The Holy Spirit will come on you , and the power of the Most High will overshadow you . So the holy one to be born will be called the Son of God . 
Even Elizabeth your relative is going to have a child in her old age , and she who was said to be unable to conceive is in her sixth month . 
For no word from God will ever fail . ”
“ I am the Lord’s servant , ” Mary answered . “ May your word to me be fulfilled . ” Then the angel left her .
Mary Visits Elizabeth
At that time Mary got ready and hurried to a town in the hill country of Judea ,
where she entered Zechariah’s home and greeted Elizabeth .
When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting , the baby leaped in her womb , and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit . 
In a loud voice she exclaimed : “ Blessed are you among women , and blessed is the child you will bear ! 
But why am I so favored , that the mother of my Lord should come to me ?
As soon as the sound of your greeting reached my ears , the baby in my womb leaped for joy .
Blessed is she who has believed that the Lord would fulfill his promises to her ! ” 
Mary’s Song
And Mary said : “ My soul glorifies the Lord
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior ,
for he has been mindful of the humble state of his servant . From now on all generations will call me blessed ,
for the Mighty One has done great things for me — holy is his name .
His mercy extends to those who fear him ,from generation to generation .
He has performed mighty deeds with his arm ; he has scattered those who are proud in their inmost thoughts .
He has brought down rulers from their thrones but has lifted up the humble .
He has filled the hungry with good things but has sent the rich away empty .
He has helped his servant Israel , remembering to be merciful
to Abraham and his descendants forever , just as he promised our ancestors . ”
Mary stayed with Elizabeth for about three months and then returned home .
The Birth of John the Baptist
When it was time for Elizabeth to have her baby , she gave birth to a son .
Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown her great mercy , and they shared her joy .
On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child , and they were going to name him after his father Zechariah , 
but his mother spoke up and said , “ No ! He is to be called John . ”
They said to her , “ There is no one among your relatives who has that name . ”
Then they made signs to his father , to find out what he would like to name the child . 
He asked for a writing tablet , and to everyone’s astonishment he wrote , “ His name is John . ”
Immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue set free , and he began to speak , praising God . 
All the neighbors were filled with awe , and throughout the hill country of Judea people were talking about all these things . 
Everyone who heard this wondered about it , asking , “ What then is this child going to be ? ” For the Lord’s hand was with him .
Zechariah’s Song
His father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied :
“ Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel , because he has come to his people and redeemed them .
He has raised up a horn[c] of salvation for us in the house of his servant David
( as he said through his holy prophets of long ago ) ,
salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us —
to show mercy to our ancestors and to remember his holy covenant ,
the oath he swore to our father Abraham :
to rescue us from the hand of our enemies , and to enable us to serve him without fear
in holiness and righteousness before him all our days .
And you , my child , will be called a prophet of the Most High ; for you will go on before the Lord to prepare the way for him ,
to give his people the knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins ,
because of the tender mercy of our God , by which the rising sun will come to us from heaven
to shine on those living in darkness and in the shadow of death , to guide our feet into the path of peace . ”
And the child grew and became strong in spirit ; and he lived in the wilderness until he appeared publicly to Israel .
The Birth of Jesus Christ
In those days Caesar Augustus issued a decree that a census should be taken of the entire Roman world . 
This was the first census that took place while Quirinius was governor of Syria .
And everyone went to their own town to register .
So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea , to Bethlehem the town of David , because he belonged to the house and line of David .
He went there to register with Mary , who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child .  
While they were there , the time came for the baby to be born ,
and she gave birth to her firstborn , a son . She wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger , because there was no guest room available for them .
And there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby , keeping watch over their flocks at night . 
An angel of the Lord appeared to them , and the glory of the Lord shone around them , and they were terrified .
But the angel said to them , “ Do not be afraid . I bring you good news that will cause great joy for all the people .
Today in the town of David a Savior has been born to you ; he is the Messiah , the Lord .
This will be a sign to you : You will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger . ”
Suddenly a great company of the heavenly host appeared with the angel , praising God and saying ,
“ Glory to God in the highest heaven , and on earth peace to those on whom his favor rests . ”
And when the angels had gone away from them into heaven , the keepers of the sheep said to one another , Let us go now to Beth-lehem , and see this thing which has come about , which the Lord has made clear to us .
And they came quickly , and saw Mary and Joseph , and the child in the place where the cattle had their food .
And when they saw it , they gave them an account of the things which had been said to them about the child .
And all those to whose ears it came were full of wonder at the things said by the keepers of the sheep .
But Mary kept all these words in her heart , and gave much thought to them .
Then the keepers of the sheep went back , giving glory and praise to God for all the things which had come to their ears and which they had seen , as it had been said to them .
And when , after eight days , the time came for his circumcision , he was named Jesus , the name which the angel had given to him before his birth .
And when the necessary days for making them clean by the law of Moses had come to an end , they took him to Jerusalem to give him to the Lord
(As it says in the law of the Lord , Every mother's first male child is to be holy to the Lord) ,
And to make an offering , as it is ordered in the law of the Lord , of two doves or other young birds .
And there was then in Jerusalem a man whose name was Simeon ; and he was an upright man , fearing God and waiting for the comfort of Israel : and the Holy Spirit was on him .
And he had knowledge , through the Holy Spirit , that he would not see death till he had seen the Lord's Christ .
And full of the Spirit he came into the Temple ; and when the father and mother came in with the child Jesus , to do with him what was ordered by the law ,
Then he took him in his arms and gave praise to God and said ,
Now you are letting your servant go in peace , O Lord , as you have said ;
For my eyes have seen your salvation ,
Which you have made ready before the face of all nations ;
A light of revelation to the Gentiles , and the glory of your people Israel .
And his father and mother were full of wonder at the things which were said about him .
And Simeon gave them his blessing and said to Mary , his mother , See , this child will be the cause of the downfall and the lifting up of great numbers of people in Israel , and he will be a sign against which hard words will be said ;
(And a sword will go through your heart ;) so that the secret thoughts of men may come to light .
And there was one , Anna , a woman prophet , the daughter of Phanuel , of the family of Asher (she was very old , and after seven years of married life
She had been a widow for eighty-four years) ; she was in the Temple at all times , worshipping with prayers and going without food , night and day .
And coming up at that time , she gave praise to God , talking of him to all those who were waiting for the freeing of Jerusalem .
And when they had done all the things which were ordered by the law of the Lord , they went back to Galilee , to Nazareth , the town where they were living .
And the child became tall and strong and full of wisdom , and the grace of God was on him .
And every year his father and mother went to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover .
And when he was twelve years old , they went up , as their way was , to the feast ;
And when the days of the feast came to an end and they were going back , the boy Jesus was still in Jerusalem , but they had no knowledge of it :
And in the belief that he was with some of their number , they went a day's journey ; and after looking for him among their relations and friends ,
And seeing that he was not there , they went back to Jerusalem , to make search for him .
And after three days they came across him in the Temple , seated among the wise men , giving ear to their words and putting questions to them .
And all to whose ears it came were full of wonder at his knowledge and the answers which he gave .
And when they saw him they were surprised , and his mother said to him , Son , why have you done this to us ? see , your father and I have been looking for you with sorrow .
And he said to them , Why were you looking for me ? was it not clear to you that my right place was in my Father's house ?
And his words seemed strange to them .
And he went down with them and came to Nazareth ; and did as he was ordered : and his mother kept all these words in her heart .
And Jesus was increasing in wisdom and in years , and in grace before God and men .
Now in the fifteenth year of the rule of Tiberius Caesar , Pontius Pilate being ruler of Judaea , and Herod being king of Galilee , his brother Philip king of the country of Ituraea and Trachonitis , and Lysanias king of Abilene ,
When Annas and Caiaphas were high priests , the word of the Lord came to John , the son of Zacharias , in the waste land .
And he came into all the country round about Jordan , preaching baptism as a sign of forgiveness of sin for those whose hearts were changed .
As it says in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet , The voice of one crying in the waste land , Make ready the way of the Lord , make his roads straight .
Every valley will be lifted up , and all the mountains and hills made low , and the twisted will be made straight , and the rough ways smooth ;
And all flesh will see the salvation of God .
So he said to the people who went out to him for baptism : You offspring of snakes , at whose word are you going in flight from the wrath to come ?
Make clear by your acts that your hearts have been changed ; and do not say to yourselves , We have Abraham for our father : for I say to you that God is able from these stones to make children of Abraham .
And even now the axe is put to the root of the trees ; and every tree which does not have good fruit will be cut down and put into the fire .
And the people put questions to him , saying , What have we to do ?
And he made answer and said to them , He who has two coats , let him give to him who has not even one ; and he who has food , let him do the same .
Then tax-farmers came to him for baptism and said to him , Master , what have we to do ?
And he said to them , Do not make an attempt to get more money than the right amount .
And men of the army put questions to him , saying , And what have we to do ? And he said to them , Do no violent acts to any man , and do not take anything without right , and let your payment be enough for you .
And while the people were waiting , and all men were questioning in their hearts about John , if he was the Christ or not ,
John made answer , saying to them all , Truly , I give you baptism with water , but one is coming who is greater than I , whose shoes I am not good enough to undo : he will give you baptism with the Holy Spirit , and with fire :
In whose hand is the instrument with which he will make clean his grain ; he will put the good grain in his store , but the waste will be burned in the fire which will never be put out .
And so comforting them with these and other words , he gave the good news to the people ;
But Herod the king , because John had made a protest on account of Herodias , his brother's wife , and other evil things which Herod had done ,
Did this most evil thing of all , and had John shut up in prison .
Now it came about that when all the people had been given baptism , Jesus , having had baptism with them , was in prayer , when , the heaven being open ,
The Holy Spirit came down in the form of a dove , and a voice came from heaven , saying , You are my dearly loved Son , with whom I am well pleased .
And Jesus at this time was about thirty years old , being the son (as it seemed) of Joseph , the son of Heli ,
The son of Matthat , the son of Levi , the son of Melchi , the son of Jannai , the son of Joseph ,
The son of Mattathias , the son of Amos , the son of Nahum , the son of Esli , the son of Naggai ,
The son of Maath , the son of Mattathias , the son of Semein , the son of Josech , the son of Joda ,
The son of Joanan , the son of Rhesa , the son of Zerubbabel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Neri ,
The son of Melchi , the son of Addi , the son of Cosam , the son of Elmadam , the son of Er ,
The son of Jesus , the son of Eliezer , the son of Jorim , the son of Matthat , the son of Levi ,
The son of Symeon , the son of Judas , the son of Joseph , the son of Jonam , the son of Eliakim ,
The son of Melea , the son of Menna , the son of Mattatha , the son of Nathan , the son of David ,
The son of Jesse , the son of Obed , the son of Boaz , the son of Salmon , the son of Nahshon ,
The son of Amminadab , the son of Arni , the son of Hezron , the son of Perez , the son of Judah ,
The son of Jacob , the son of Isaac , the son of Abraham , the son of Terah , the son of Nahor ,
The son of Serug , the son of Reu , the son of Peleg , the son of Eber , the son of Shelah ,
The son of Cainan , the son of Arphaxad , the son of Shem , the son of Noah , the son of Lamech ,
The son of Methuselah , the son of Enoch , the son of Jared , the son of Mahalaleel , the son of Cainan ,
The son of Enos , the son of Seth , the son of Adam , the son of God .
And Jesus , full of the Holy Spirit , came back from the Jordan , and was guided by the Spirit in the waste land
For forty days , being tested by the Evil One . And he had no food in those days ; and when they came to an end , he was in need of food .
And the Evil One said to him , If you are the Son of God , give orders to this stone to become bread .
And Jesus made answer to him , It has been said in the Writings , Bread is not man's only need .
And he took him up and let him see all the kingdoms of the earth in a minute of time .
And the Evil One said , I will give you authority over all these , and the glory of them , for it has been given to me , and I give it to anyone at my pleasure .
If then you will give worship to me , it will all be yours .
And Jesus in answer said to him , It has been said in the Writings , Give worship to the Lord your God , and be his servant only .
And he took him to Jerusalem and put him on the highest point of the Temple and said to him , If you are the Son of God , let yourself go down from here ; for it is said in the Writings ,
He will give his angels orders to take care of you :
And , In their hands they will keep you up , so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone .
And Jesus made answer and said to him , It is said in the Writings , You may not put the Lord your God to the test .
And when all these tests were ended the Evil One went away from him for a time .
And Jesus came back to Galilee in the power of the Spirit , and the news of him went through all the country round about .
And he was teaching in their Synagogues and all men gave him praise .
And he came to Nazareth , where he had been as a child , and he went , as his way was , into the Synagogue on the Sabbath , and got up to give a reading .
And the book of the prophet Isaiah was given to him and , opening the book , he came on the place where it is said ,
The Spirit of the Lord is on me , because I am marked out by him to give good news to the poor ; he has sent me to make well those who are broken-hearted ; to say that the prisoners will be let go , and the blind will see , and to make the wounded free from their chains ,
To give knowledge that the year of the Lord's good pleasure is come .
And shutting the book he gave it back to the servant and took his seat : and the eyes of all in the Synagogue were fixed on him .
Then he said to them , Today this word has come true in your hearing .
And they were all giving witness , with wonder , to the words of grace which came from his mouth : and they said , Is not this the son of Joseph ?
And he said to them , Without doubt you will say to me , Let the medical man make himself well : the things which to our knowledge were done at Capernaum , do them here in your country .
And he said to them , Truly I say to you , No prophet is honoured in his country .
Truly I say to you , There were a number of widows in Israel in the days of Elijah , when the heaven was shut up for three years and six months and there was no food in the land ;
But Elijah was not sent to one of them , but only to Zarephath , in the land of Sidon , to a woman who was a widow .
And there were a number of lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet , and not one of them was made clean , but only Naaman the Syrian .
And all who were in the Synagogue were very angry when these things were said to them .
And they got up and took him out of the town to the edge of the mountain on which their town was , so that they might send him down to his death .
But he came through them and went on his way .
And he came down to Capernaum , a town of Galilee ; and he was giving them teaching on the Sabbath .
And they were surprised at his teaching , for his word was with authority .
And there was a man in the Synagogue who had an unclean spirit ; and he gave a loud cry and said ,
Let us be ! what have we to do with you , Jesus of Nazareth ? have you come to put an end to us ? I have knowledge who you are , the Holy One of God .
And Jesus said to him , Be quiet , and come out of him . And when the evil spirit had put him down on the earth in the middle of them , he came out of him , having done him no damage .
And wonder came on them all and they said to one another , What are these words ? for with authority and power he gives orders to the evil spirits and they come out .
And there was much talk about him in all the places round about .
And he got up and went out of the Synagogue and went into the house of Simon . And Simon's wife's mother was very ill with a burning heat ; and in answer to their prayers for her
He went near her , and with a sharp word he gave orders to the disease and it went away from her ; and straight away she got up and took care of their needs .
And at sundown all those who had anyone ill with any sort of disease , took them to him , and he put his hands on every one of them and made them well .
And evil spirits came out of a number of them , crying out and saying , You are the Son of God . But he gave them sharp orders not to say a word , because they had knowledge that he was the Christ .
And when it was day , he came out and went to a waste place ; and great numbers of people came looking for him , and they came to him and would have kept him from going away .
But he said to them , I have to give the good news of the kingdom of God in other towns , because that is why I was sent .
And he was teaching in the Synagogues of Galilee .
Now it came about that while the people came pushing to be near him , and to have knowledge of the word of God , he was by a wide stretch of water named Gennesaret ;
And he saw two boats by the edge of the water , but the fishermen had gone out of them and were washing their nets .
And he got into one of the boats , the property of Simon , and made a request to him to go a little way out from the land . And being seated he gave the people teaching from the boat .
And when his talk was ended , he said to Simon , Go out into deep water , and let down your nets for fish .
And Simon , answering , said , Master , we were working all night and we took nothing : but at your word I will let down the nets .
And when they had done this , they got such a great number of fish that it seemed as if their nets would be broken ;
And they made signs to their friends in the other boat to come to their help . And they came , and the two boats were so full that they were going down .
But Simon , when he saw it , went down at the knees of Jesus and said , Go away from me , O Lord , for I am a sinner .
For he was full of wonder and so were all those who were with him , at the number of fish which they had taken ;
And so were James and John , the sons of Zebedee , who were working with Simon . And Jesus said to Simon , Have no fear ; from this time forward you will be a fisher of men .
And when they had got their boats to the land , they gave up everything and went after him .
And it came about that while he was in one of the towns , there was a leper there : and when he saw Jesus he went down on his face in prayer to him , saying , Lord , if it is your pleasure , you have power to make me clean .
And he put out his hand to him and said , It is my pleasure ; be clean . And straight away his disease went from him .
And he gave him orders : Say nothing to any man , but let the priest see you and give an offering so that you may be made clean , as the law of Moses says , and for a witness to them .
But news of him went out all the more , in every direction , and great numbers of people came together to give hearing to his words and to be made well from their diseases .
But he went away by himself to a waste place for prayer .
And it came about that on one of these days he was teaching ; and some Pharisees and teachers of the law were seated there , who had come from every town of Galilee and Judaea and from Jerusalem ; and the power of the Lord was with him , to make those who were ill free from their diseases .
And some men had with them , on a bed , a man who was ill , without power of moving ; and they made attempts to get him in and put him before Jesus .
And because of the mass of people , there was no way to get him in ; so they went up on the top of the house and let him down through the roof , on his bed , into the middle in front of Jesus .
And seeing their faith he said , Man , you have forgiveness for your sins .
And the scribes and Pharisees were having an argument , saying , Who is this , who has no respect for God ? who is able to give forgiveness for sins , but God only ?
But Jesus , who had knowledge of their thoughts , said to them , Why are you reasoning in your hearts ?
Which is the simpler : to say , You have forgiveness for your sins ; or to say , Get up and go ?
But so that you may see that on earth the Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins , (he said to the man who was ill ,) I say to you , Get up , and take up your bed , and go into your house .
And straight away he got up before them , and took up his bed and went away to his house giving praise to God .
And wonder overcame them all , and they gave glory to God ; and they were full of fear , saying , We have seen strange things today .
And after these things he went out , and saw Levi , a tax-farmer , seated at the place where taxes were taken , and said to him , Come after me .
And giving up his business , he got up and went after him .
And Levi made a great feast for him in his house : and a great number of tax-farmers and others were seated at table with them .
And the Pharisees and their scribes made protests against his disciples , saying , Why do you take food and drink with tax-farmers and sinners ?
And Jesus , answering , said to them , Those who are well have no need of a medical man , but those who are ill .
I have come , not to get the upright , but sinners , so that they may be turned from their sins .
And they said to him , The disciples of John frequently go without food , and make prayers , and so do the disciples of the Pharisees ; but your disciples take food and drink .
And Jesus said , Are you able to make the friends of the newly-married man go without food when he is with them ?
But the days will come when he will be taken away from them , and then they will go without food .
And he said to them , in a story , No man takes a bit of cloth from a new coat and puts it on to an old coat , for so the new coat would be damaged and the bit from the new would not go well with the old .
And no man puts new wine into old wine-skins , for fear that the skins will be burst by the new wine , and the wine be let out , and the skins come to destruction .
But new wine has to be put into new wine-skins .
And no man , having had old wine , has any desire for new , for he says , The old is better .
Now it came about that on the Sabbath he was going through the fields of grain , and his disciples took the heads of the grain for food , crushing them in their hands .
But some of the Pharisees said , Why do you do what it is not right to do on the Sabbath ?
And Jesus said , Have you not seen in the Writings what David did when he was in need of food , he , and those who were with him ;
How he went into the house of God and took for food the holy bread , which only the priests may take , and gave it to those who were with him ?
And he said , The Son of man is lord even of the Sabbath .
And it came about , on another Sabbath , that he went into the Synagogue and was teaching there . And a man was there whose right hand was dead .
And the scribes and Pharisees were watching him to see if he would make him well on the Sabbath , so that they might be able to say something against him .
But he had knowledge of their thoughts ; and he said to the man whose hand was dead , Get up and come into the middle . And he got up and came forward .
And Jesus said , I put the question to you , Is it right to do good on the Sabbath or to do evil ? to give life or to take it away ?
And looking round on all of them , he said to him , Put out your hand . And he did so : and his hand was made well .
But they were full of wrath , and were talking together about what they might do to Jesus .
And it came about in those days that he went out to the mountain for prayer ; and he was all night in prayer to God .
And the day came and , turning to his disciples , he made a selection from among them of twelve , to whom he gave the name of Apostles ;
Simon , to whom he gave the name of Peter , and Andrew , his brother , and James and John and Philip and Bartholomew
And Matthew and Thomas and James , the son of Alphaeus , and Simon , who was named the Zealot ,
And Judas , the son of James , and Judas Iscariot , he who was false to him .
And he came down with them to a level place , and a great band of his disciples , and a very great number of people from all Judaea and Jerusalem and from the parts of Tyre and Sidon by the sea , came to give hearing to him , and to be made well from their diseases ;
And those who were troubled with unclean spirits were made well .
And all the people were desiring to be touched by him , for power came from him and made them all well .
And turning his eyes to his disciples he said , Happy are you who are poor : for the kingdom of God is yours .
Happy are you who are in need of food now : for you will be made full . Happy are you who are weeping now ; for you will be glad .
Happy are you , when men have hate for you , and put you away from among them and say angry words to you , turning away in disgust at your name , because of the Son of man .
Be glad in that day , and be lifted up for joy , for your reward in heaven will be great : for their fathers did these same things to the prophets .
But unhappy are you who have wealth : for you have been comforted now .
Unhappy are you who are full of food now : for you will be in need . Unhappy are you who are laughing now : for you will be crying in sorrow .
Unhappy are you when all men give you their approval : for so their fathers did to the false prophets .
But I say to you who give ear to me , Have love for those who are against you , do good to those who have hate for you ,
Give blessing to those who give you curses , say prayers for those who are cruel to you .
If a man gives you a blow on one side of your face , then let the other side be turned to him ; from him who takes away your coat , do not keep back your robe .
Give to everyone who comes with a request , and if a man takes away your property , make no attempt to get it back again .
Do to others as you would have them do to you .
If you have love for those who have love for you , what credit is it to you ? for even sinners have love for those who have love for them .
And if you do good to those who do good to you , what credit is it to you ? for even sinners do the same .
And if you let those have the use of your money , from whom you are hoping to get it back , what credit is it to you ? even sinners do so to sinners , hoping to get back as much as they gave .
But be loving to those who are against you and do them good , and give them your money , not giving up hope , and your reward will be great and you will be the sons of the Most High : for he is kind to evil men , and to those who have hard hearts .
Be full of pity , even as your Father is full of pity .
Be not judges of others , and you will not be judged : do not give punishment to others , and you will not get punishment yourselves : make others free , and you will be made free :
Give , and it will be given to you ; good measure , crushed down , full and running over , they will give to you . For in the same measure as you give , it will be given to you again .
And he gave them teaching in the form of a story , saying , Is it possible for one blind man to be guide to another ? will they not go falling together into a hole ?
The disciple is not greater than his master , but everyone whose learning is complete will be like his master .
And why do you take note of the grain of dust in your brother's eye , but take no note of the bit of wood which is in your eye ?
How will you say to your brother , Brother , let me take the grain of dust out of your eye , when you yourself do not see the bit of wood in your eye ? O false one ! first take the wood out of your eye and then you will see clearly to take the dust out of your brother's eye .
For no good tree gives bad fruit , and no bad tree gives good fruit .
For every tree is judged by its fruit . Men do not get figs from thorns , or grapes from blackberry plants .
The good man , out of the good store of his heart , gives good things ; and the evil man , out of his evil store , gives evil : for out of the full store of the heart come the words of the mouth .
After he had come to the end of all his words in the hearing of the people , he went into Capernaum .
And a certain captain had a servant who was very dear to him ; this servant was ill and near to death .
And when news of Jesus came to his ears , he sent to him rulers of the Jews , requesting that he would come and make his servant well .
And they , when they came to Jesus , made their request warmly , saying ,
It is right for you to do this for him , because he is a friend to our nation , and himself has put up a Synagogue for us .
And Jesus went with them . And when he was not far from the house , the man sent friends to him , saying , Lord , do not give yourself trouble : for I am not important enough for you to come into my house :
And I had the feeling that I was not even good enough to come to you : but say the word only , and my servant will be well .
For I , myself , am a man under authority , having men under me ; and I say to this one , Go , and he goes ; and to another , Come , and he comes ; and to my servant , Do this , and he does it .
And when these things were said to Jesus , he was surprised , and , turning to the mass of people coming after him , said , I have not seen such great faith , no , not in Israel .
And when those who were sent came back to the house they saw that the servant was well .
And it came about , after a little time , that he went to a town named Nain ; and his disciples went with him , and a great number of people .
Now when he came near the door of the town , a dead man was being taken out , the only son of his mother , who was a widow : and a great number of people from the town were with her .
And when the Lord saw her , he had pity on her and said to her , Be not sad .
And he came near , and put his hand on the stretcher where the dead man was : and those who were moving it came to a stop . And he said , Young man , I say to you , Get up .
And the dead man got up , and words came from his lips . And he gave him to his mother .
And fear came on all , and they gave praise to God , saying , A great prophet is among us : and , God has given thought to his people .
And this story about him went through all Judaea and the places round about .
And the disciples of John gave him an account of all these things .
Then John sent two of his disciples to the Lord , saying , Are you he who is to come , or are we waiting for another ?
And when the men came to him they said , John the Baptist has sent us to you , saying , Are you he who is to come , or are we waiting for another ?
At that time , he made a number of people free from their diseases and their pains , and from evil spirits ; and to others who were blind he gave back the use of their eyes .
And answering them he said , Go back and give news to John of what you have seen , and the things which have come to your ears ; the blind now see , those who had no power in their legs are walking , lepers are made clean , those who had no hearing now have their ears open , dead men come to life again , and the poor have the good news given to them .
And a blessing will be on him who has no doubts about me .
And when the men who were sent by John had gone away , he said to the people , about John , What did you go out into the waste land to see ? a tall stem moving in the wind ?
But what did you go out to see ? a man in soft clothing ? See now , those who have beautiful clothing and delicate food are in kings' houses .
But what did you go out to see ? a prophet ? Yes , I say to you , and more than a prophet .
This is he of whom it has been said , See , I send my servant before your face , who will make ready your way before you .
I say to you , Among all the sons of women , not one is greater than John : but he who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he .
(And all the people , and the tax-farmers , to whom John had given baptism , when they had knowledge of these things , gave glory to God .
But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law were against the purpose of God for themselves , not having had his baptism .)
What comparison am I to make of the men of this generation ? what are they like ?
They are like children who are seated in the market-place , crying out to one another , and saying , We made music for you , but you did not take part in the dance ; we gave cries of sorrow , but you were not sad .
For John the Baptist came , taking no food or drink , and you say , He has an evil spirit .
The Son of man came feasting , and you say , Here is a lover of food and wine , a friend of tax-farmers and sinners .
But wisdom is judged to be right by all her children .
And one of the Pharisees made a request that he would take a meal with him . And he went into the Pharisee's house and took his seat at the table .
And there was a woman in the town who was a sinner ; and when she had news that he was a guest in the Pharisee's house , she took a bottle of perfume ,
And went in and took her place at the back of him , near his feet , weeping , so that his feet were washed with the drops from her eyes , and with her hair she made them dry , and kissing his feet she put the perfume on them .
Now when the Pharisee in whose house he was saw it , he said to himself , This man , if he was a prophet , would be conscious what sort of woman this is who has put her hands on him , that she is a sinner .
And Jesus , answering , said , Simon , I have something to say to you . And he said , Master , say on .
And he said , Two men were in debt to a certain man of business : one had a debt of five hundred pence , and the other of fifty .
When they were unable to make payment , he made the two of them free of their debts . Which of them , now , will have the greater love for him ?
Simon , in answer , said , It seems he whose debt was greater . And he said , Your decision is right .
And turning to the woman he said to Simon , You see this woman ? I came into your house ; you did not give me water for my feet : but she has been washing my feet with the drops from her eyes , and drying them with her hair .
You did not give me a kiss : but she , from the time when I came in , has gone on kissing my feet .
You put no oil on my head : but she has put perfume on my feet .
And so I say to you , She will have forgiveness for her sins which are great in number , because of her great love : but he who has small need of forgiveness gives little love .
And he said to her , You have forgiveness for your sins .
And those who were seated at table with him said to themselves , Who is this who even gives forgiveness of sins ?
And he said to the woman , By your faith you have salvation ; go in peace .
And it came about , after a short time , that he went through town and country giving the good news of the kingdom of God , and with him were the twelve ,
And certain women who had been made free from evil spirits and diseases , Mary named Magdalene , from whom seven evil spirits had gone out ,
And Joanna , the wife of Chuza , Herod's chief house-servant , and Susanna and a number of others , who gave him of their wealth for his needs .
And when a great number of people came together , and men from every town went out to him , he gave them teaching in the form of a story :
A man went out to put in seed , and while he was doing it , some was dropped by the wayside and it was crushed under foot , and was taken by the birds of heaven .
And some went on the rock , and when it came up it became dry and dead because it had no water .
And some went among thorns , and the thorns came up with it and it had no room for growth .
And some falling on good earth , came up and gave fruit a hundred times as much . And with these words he said in a loud voice , He who has ears , let him give ear .
And his disciples put questions to him about the point of the story .
And he said , To you is given knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of God ; but to the others , they are given in stories , so that seeing , they may not see , and though they give hearing , the sense will not be clear to them .
Now this is the point of the story : The seed is the word of God .
Those by the side of the road are those who have given hearing ; then the Evil One comes and takes away the word from their hearts , so that they may not have faith and get salvation .
And those on the rock are those who with joy give hearing to the word ; but having no root , they have faith for a time , and when the test comes they give up .
And those which went among thorns are those who have given hearing , and go on their way , but they are overcome by cares and wealth and the pleasures of life , and they give no fruit .
And those in the good earth are those who , having given ear to the word , keep it with a good and true heart , and in quiet strength give fruit .
No man , when the light is lighted , puts a cover over it , or puts it under a bed , but he puts it on its table , so that those who come in may see the light .
For nothing is put out of view which will not be made clear , and nothing is secret of which the knowledge will not come to light .
So take care how you give hearing , for to him who has will be given , and from him who has not will be taken even what he seems to have .
And his mother and his brothers came to him , and they were not able to get near him because of the great number of people .
And someone said to him , Your mother and your brothers are outside desiring to see you .
But he said to them in answer , My mother and my brothers are those who have knowledge of the word of God and do it .
Now it came about on one of those days that he got into a boat with his disciples ; and he said to them , Let us go over to the other side of the water : and they put out the boat .
But while they were sailing he went to sleep : and a storm of wind came down on the sea , and the boat became full of water and they were in danger .
Then they came to him and , awaking him out of his sleep , said , Master , Master , destruction is near . And he , when he was awake , gave orders to the wind and the rolling waves , and the storm came to an end , and all was calm .
And he said to them , Where is your faith ? And fear and wonder overcame them , and they said to one another , Who then is this , who gives orders even to the winds and the water and they do what he says ?
And they came to the country of the Gerasenes , which is opposite Galilee .
And when he had come to the land , there came to him a certain man from the town who had evil spirits ; and for a long time he had had no clothing on , and was not living in a house but in the place of the dead .
And when he saw Jesus , he gave a loud cry and went down on the earth before him and in a loud voice said , What have I to do with you , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? Do not be cruel to me .
For he gave an order to the evil spirit to come out of the man . For frequently it would take a grip of him : and he was kept under control , and prisoned with chains ; but parting the chains in two , he would be sent by the driving of the evil spirit into waste places .
And Jesus said to him , What is your name ? And he said , Legion ; for a number of spirits had gone into him .
And they made a request to him that he would not give them an order to go away into the deep .
Now there was a great herd of pigs in that place , getting food on the mountain : and the evil spirits made a request to him that he would let them go into the pigs , and he let them .
And the evil spirits came out of the man and went into the pigs : and the herd went rushing down a sharp slope into the water and came to destruction .
And when the men who took care of them saw what had come about , they went quickly and gave news of it in the town and the country .
And they went out to see what had taken place , and they came to Jesus and saw the man out of whom the evil spirits had gone , seated , clothed and with full use of his senses , at the feet of Jesus ; and fear came on them .
And those who had seen it gave them an account of how the man who had the evil spirits was made well .
And all the people of the country of the Gerasenes made a request to him to go away from them ; for they were in great fear : and he got into a boat and went back .
But the man from whom the evil spirits had gone out had a great desire to be with him , but he sent him away , saying ,
Go back to your house and let them have news of all the great things which God has done for you . And he went away , giving word through all the town of the great things which Jesus had done for him .
And when Jesus went back , the people were glad to see him , for they were all waiting for him .
Then there came a man named Jairus , who was a ruler in the Synagogue : and he went down at the feet of Jesus , desiring him to come to his house ;
For he had an only daughter , about twelve years old , and she was near to death . But while he was on his way , the people were pushing to be near him .
And a woman , who had had a flow of blood for twelve years , and had given all her money to medical men , and not one of them was able to make her well ,
Came after him and put her hand on the edge of his robe , and straight away the flowing of her blood was stopped .
And Jesus said , Who was touching me ? And when they all said , It is not I , Peter and those who were with him said , Master , the people are pushing round you on every side .
But Jesus said , Someone was touching me , for I had the feeling that power had gone out from me .
And when the woman saw that she was not able to keep it secret , she came , shaking with fear , and falling down before him she made clear before all the people the reason for her touching him , and how she was made well straight away .
And he said to her , Daughter , your faith has made you well ; go in peace .
While he was still talking , someone came from the house of the ruler of the Synagogue , saying , Your daughter is dead ; do not go on troubling the Master .
But Jesus at these words said to him , Have no fear , only have faith , and she will be made well .
And when he came to the house he did not let any man go in with him , but only Peter and John and James , and the father of the girl and her mother .
And all the people were weeping and crying for her ; but he said , Do not be sad , for she is not dead , but sleeping .
And they were laughing at him , being certain that she was dead .
But he , taking her hand , said to her , My child , get up .
And her spirit came back to her and she got up straight away : and he gave orders that food was to be given to her .
And her father and mother were full of wonder , but he gave orders to them to say nothing about it to anyone .
And getting the twelve together , he gave them power and authority over all evil spirits and over diseases , to make them well .
And he sent them out to be preachers of the kingdom of God , and to make well those who were ill .
And he said to them , Take nothing for your journey , no stick or bag or bread or money , and do not take two coats .
And if you go into a house , let that house be your resting-place till you go away .
And if any people will not take you in , when you go away from that town , put off its dust from your feet for a witness against them .
And they went away , journeying through all the towns , preaching the good news and making people free from diseases in all places .
Now Herod the king had news of all these things : and he was in doubt , because it was said by some people that John had come back from the dead ;
And by some , that Elijah had come ; and by others , that one of the old prophets had come back to life .
And Herod said , I put John to death : but who is this , of whom such stories are given to me ? And he had a desire to see him .
And the twelve , when they came back , gave him an account of what they had done . And he took them with him and went away from the people to a town named Beth-saida .
But the people , getting news of it , went after him : and he was pleased to see them , and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God , and made those well who were in need of it .
And the day went on ; and the twelve came to him and said , Send these people away so that they may go into the towns and the country round about and get resting-places and food for themselves , for we are in a waste place .
But he said , Give them food yourselves . And they said , We have only five cakes of bread and two fishes , if we do not go and get food for all these people .
For there were about five thousand men . And he said to his disciples , Make them be seated in groups , about fifty to a group .
And they did so , and made them all be seated .
And he took the five cakes of bread and the two fishes and , looking up to heaven , he said words of blessing over them , and when they had been broken , he gave them to the disciples to give to the people .
And they all took the food and had enough ; and they took up of the broken bits which were over , twelve baskets full .
And it came about that when he was in prayer , by himself , and the disciples were with him , he put a question to them , saying , Who do the people say I am ?
And they , answering , said , John the Baptist ; but others say Elijah ; and others , that one of the old prophets has come back .
And he said , But who do you say that I am ? And Peter , answering , said , The Christ of God .
But he gave them special orders , not to say this to any man ;
Saying , The Son of man will undergo much and be put on one side by the rulers and the chief priests and the teachers of the law , and be put to death , and on the third day he will come back to life .
And he said to them all , If any man has a desire to come after me , let him give up all , and take up his cross every day , and come after me .
For whoever has a desire to keep his life will have it taken from him , but whoever gives up his life because of me , will keep it .
For what profit will a man have if he gets all the world , but undergoes loss or destruction himself ?
For if any man has a feeling of shame because of me or of my words , the Son of man will have shame because of him when he comes in his glory and the glory of the Father and of the holy angels .
But truly I say to you , Some of those who are here now will have no taste of death till they see the kingdom of God .
And about eight days after he had said these things , he took Peter and John and James with him and went up into the mountain for prayer .
And while he was in prayer , his face was changed and his clothing became white and shining .
And two men , Moses and Elijah , were talking with him ;
Who were seen in glory and were talking of his death which was about to take place in Jerusalem .
Now Peter and those who were with him were overcome with sleep : but when they were fully awake , they saw his glory and the two men who were with him .
And when they were about to go away from him , Peter said to Jesus , Master , it is good for us to be here ; let us make three tents , one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah : having no knowledge of what he was saying .
And while he said these things , the shade of a cloud came over them , and they were full of fear when they went into the cloud .
And there was a voice from the cloud saying , This is my Son , the man of my selection ; give ear to him .
And after the voice was gone they saw that Jesus was by himself . And they kept quiet , and said nothing at that time to anyone of the things which they had seen .
And on the day after , when they came down from the mountain , a great band of people came to him .
And a man from among them , crying out , said , Master , I make a request to you , give a thought to my son , for he is my only child :
And see , a spirit takes him , and suddenly he gives a cry , twisted in pain and streaming at the lips , and when it goes away from him at last , he is marked as from blows .
And I made a request to your disciples to send it out of him , but they were not able to do it .
And Jesus said , O generation without faith and false in heart , how long will I have to be with you and put up with you ? let your son come here .
And while he was coming , he was pushed violently down and twisted by the evil spirit . But Jesus gave sharp orders to the unclean spirit , and made the boy well , and gave him back to his father .
And they were full of wonder at the great power of God . But while they were all wondering at all the things which he did , he said to his disciples ,
Let these words go deep into your ears , for the Son of man will be given up into the hands of men .
But this saying was not clear to them and its sense was kept secret from them so that they were not able to see it : and they had fear of questioning him about it .
Now there was a discussion among them about which of them would be the greatest .
But when Jesus saw the reasoning of their hearts , he took a small child and put him by his side ,
And said to them , Whoever gives honour to this child in my name , gives honour to me : and whoever gives honour to me , gives honour to him who sent me : for whoever is least among you all , that man is great .
And John , answering , said , Master , we saw a man driving out evil spirits in your name , and we did not let him do it , because he was not one of us .
But Jesus said to him , Let him do it , for he who is not against you is for you .
And it came about that when the days were near for him to be taken up , his face was turned to go to Jerusalem ,
And he sent men before : and they came to a small town of Samaria to make ready for him .
But they would not have him there , because he was clearly going to Jerusalem .
And when his disciples , James and John , saw this , they said , Lord , may we send fire from heaven and put an end to them ?
But turning round he said sharp words to them .
And they went to another small town .
And when they were on the way , a certain man said to him , I will come after you wherever you go .
And Jesus said to him , Foxes have holes and the birds of the air have resting-places , but the Son of man has nowhere to put his head .
And he said to another , Come after me . But he said , Lord , let me first go and give the last honours to my father .
But he said to him , Let the dead take care of their dead ; it is for you to go and give news of the kingdom of God .
And another man said , I will come with you , Lord , but first let me say a last good-day to those who are at my house .
But Jesus said , No man , having put his hand to the plough and looking back , is good enough for the kingdom of God .
Now after these things , the Lord made selection of seventy others and sent them before him , two together , into every town and place where he himself was about to come .
And he said to them , There is much grain ready to be cut , but not enough workers : so make prayer to the Lord of the grain-fields that he will send workers to get in the grain .
Go on your way : see , I send you out like lambs among wolves .
Take no bag for money or for food , and no shoes ; say no word to any man on the way .
And whenever you go into a house , first say , Peace be to this house .
And if a son of peace is there , your peace will be with him : but if not , it will come back to you again .
And keep in that same house , taking what food and drink they give you : for the worker has a right to his reward . Do not go from house to house .
And into whatever town you go , if they take you in , take whatever food is given to you :
And make well those in it who are ill and say to them , The kingdom of God is near to you .
But if you go into a town where they will not have you , go out into the streets of it and say ,
Even the dust of your town , which is on our feet , we put off as a witness against you ; but be certain of this , that the kingdom of God is near .
I say to you , It will be better in that day for Sodom than for that town .
A curse is on you , Chorazin ! A curse is on you , Beth-saida ! For if such works of power had been done in Tyre and Sidon as have been done in you , they would have been turned from their sins , in days gone by , seated in the dust .
But it will be better for Tyre and Sidon , in the day of judging , than for you .
And you , Capernaum , were you not lifted up to heaven ? you will go down to hell .
Whoever gives ear to you , gives ear to me ; and whoever is against you , is against me ; and whoever is against me , is against him who sent me .
And the seventy came back with joy , saying , Lord , even the evil spirits are under our power in your name .
And he said , I was watching for Satan , falling from heaven like a star .
See , I have given you power to put your feet on snakes and evil beasts , and over all the strength of him who is against you : and nothing will do you damage .
Do not be glad , however , because you have power over spirits , but because your names are recorded in heaven .
In that same hour he was full of joy in the Holy Spirit and said , I give praise to you , O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , because you have kept these things secret from the wise and the men of learning , and have made them clear to little children : for so , O Father , it was pleasing in your eyes .
All things have been given to me by my Father : and no one has knowledge of the Son , but only the Father : and of the Father , but only the Son , and he to whom the Son will make it clear .
And , turning to the disciples , he said privately , Happy are the eyes which see the things you see :
For I say to you that numbers of prophets and kings have had a desire to see the things which you see , and have not seen them , and to have knowledge of the things which have come to your ears , and they had it not .
And a certain teacher of the law got up and put him to the test , saying , Master , what have I to do so that I may have eternal life ?
And he said to him , What does the law say , in your reading of it ?
And he , answering , said , Have love for the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind ; and for your neighbour as for yourself .
And he said , You have given the right answer : do this and you will have life .
But he , desiring to put himself in the right , said to Jesus , And who is my neighbour ?
And Jesus , answering him , said , A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho , and he got into the hands of thieves , who took his clothing and gave him cruel blows , and when they went away , he was half dead .
And by chance a certain priest was going down that way : and when he saw him , he went by on the other side .
And in the same way , a Levite , when he came to the place and saw him , went by on the other side .
But a certain man of Samaria , journeying that way , came where he was , and when he saw him , he was moved with pity for him ,
And came to him and put clean linen round his wounds , with oil and wine ; and he put him on his beast and took him to a house and took care of him .
And the day after he took two pennies and gave them to the owner of the house and said , Take care of him ; and if this money is not enough , when I come again I will give you whatever more is needed .
Which of these three men , in your opinion , was neighbour to the man who came into the hands of thieves ?
And he said , The one who had mercy on him . And Jesus said , Go and do the same .
Now , while they were on their way , he came to a certain town ; and a woman named Martha took him into her house .
And she had a sister , by name Mary , who took her seat at the Lord's feet and gave attention to his words .
But Martha had her hands full of the work of the house , and she came to him and said , Lord , is it nothing to you that my sister has let me do all the work ? Say to her that she is to give me some help .
But the Lord , answering , said to her , Martha , Martha , you are full of care and troubled about such a number of things :
Little is needed , or even one thing only : for Mary has taken that good part , which will not be taken away from her .
And it came about that he was in prayer in a certain place , and when he came to an end , one of his disciples said to him , Lord , will you give us teaching about prayer , as John did to his disciples ?
And he said to them , When you say your prayers , say , Father , may your name be kept holy and your kingdom come .
Give us every day bread for our needs .
May we have forgiveness for our sins , as we make free all those who are in debt to us . And let us not be put to the test .
And he said to them , Which of you , having a friend , would go to him in the middle of the night and say to him , Friend , let me have three cakes of bread ;
Because a friend of mine has come to me on a journey , and I have nothing to put before him ;
And he , from inside the house , would say in answer , Do not be a trouble to me ; the door is now shut , and my children are with me in bed ; it is not possible for me to get up and give to you ?
I say to you , Though he will not get up and give to him , because he is his friend , still , if he keeps on making his request , he will get up and give him as much as he has need of .
And I say to you , Make requests , and they will be answered ; what you are searching for , you will get ; when you give the sign , the door will be open to you .
For to everyone who makes a request , it will be given ; and he who is searching will get his desire ; and to him who gives the sign , the door will be open .
And which of you , being a father , will give a stone to his son , who makes request for bread ? or for a fish , will give him a snake ?
Or for an egg , will give him a scorpion ?
If , then , you who are evil are able to give good things to your children , how much more will your Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who make request to him ?
And he was sending an evil spirit out of a man who was without the power of talking . And it came about that when the spirit had gone the man had the power of talking ; and the people were full of wonder .
But some of them said , He sends out evil spirits by Beelzebul , the ruler of evil spirits .
And others , testing him , were looking for a sign from heaven from him .
But he , having knowledge of their thoughts , said to them , Every kingdom in which there is division is made waste ; and a house in which there is division comes to destruction .
If , then , Satan is at war with himself , how will he keep his kingdom ? because you say that I send evil spirits out of men by the help of Beelzebul .
And if I , by Beelzebul , send out evil spirits , by whose help do your sons send them out ? so let them be your judges .
But if I , by the finger of God , send out evil spirits , then the kingdom of God has overtaken you .
When the strong man armed keeps watch over his house , then his goods are safe :
But when one who is stronger makes an attack on him and overcomes him , he takes away his instruments of war , in which he had put his faith , and makes division of his goods .
He who is not with me is against me , and he who will not give me help in getting people together is driving them away .
The unclean spirit , when he has gone out of a man , goes through dry places , looking for rest ; and when he does not get it , he says , I will go back to my house from which I came .
And when he comes , he sees that it has been made fair and clean .
Then he goes and gets seven other spirits more evil than himself , and they go in , and take their places there : and the last condition of that man is worse than the first .
And it came about that when he said these things , a certain woman among the people said in a loud voice , Happy is the body which gave you birth , and the breasts from which you took milk .
But he said , More happy are they who give hearing to the word of God and keep it .
And when a great number of people came together to him , he said , This generation is an evil generation : it is looking for a sign and no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah .
For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites , so will the Son of man be to this generation .
The queen of the South will come up on the day of judging and give her decision against the men of this generation : for she came from the ends of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of Solomon ; and now something greater than Solomon is here .
The men of Nineveh will come up in the day of judging and give their decision against this generation : for they were turned away from their sins at the preaching of Jonah ; but now something greater than Jonah is here .
No man , when the light has been lighted , puts it in a secret place , or under a vessel , but on its table , so that those who come in may see the light .
The light of the body is the eye : when your eye is true , all your body is full of light ; but when it is evil , your body is dark .
So take care that the light which is in you is not dark .
If , then , all your body is light , with no part of it dark , it will be completely full of light , as when a flame with its bright shining gives you light .
Now , while he was talking , a Pharisee made a request that he would come to a meal with him ; and he went in and took his seat at the meal .
And when the Pharisee saw it , he was surprised because he came to the meal without first washing himself .
And the Lord said to him , You Pharisees make the outside of the cup and the plate clean ; but inside you are thieves and full of evil .
O you foolish ones ! did not he who made the outside in the same way make the inside ?
But if you give to the poor such things as you are able , then all things are clean to you .
But a curse is on you , Pharisees ! for you make men give a tenth of every sort of plant , and give no thought to right and the love of God ; but it is right for you to do these things , and not let the others be undone .
A curse is on you , Pharisees ! for your desires are for the most important seats in the Synagogues and for words of respect said to you in the market-place .
A curse is on you ! for you are like the resting-places of dead men , which are not seen , and men go walking over them without knowledge of it .
And one of the teachers of the law , answering , said to him , Master , in saying this , you give a bad name to us as to them .
And he said , A curse is on you , teachers of the law ! for while other men are crushed under the weight of the rules you make for them , you yourselves do not put so much as one finger to them .
A curse is on you ! for you make resting-places for the bodies of the prophets , but your fathers put them to death .
So you are witnesses and give approval to the work of your fathers ; for they put them to death and you make their last resting-places .
For this reason the wisdom of God has said , I will send them prophets and teachers , and to some of them they will give death and cruel pains ;
So that punishment may come on this generation for the blood of all the prophets which was given from the earliest days ;
From the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah , who was put to death between the altar and the Temple . Yes , I say to you , It will come on this generation .
A curse is on you , teachers of the law ! for you have taken away the key of knowledge : you did not go in yourselves , and you got in the way of those who were going in .
And when he had come out of that place , the scribes and the Pharisees came round him angrily , questioning him about more things ;
And watching him , for a chance to get something from his words which might be used against him .
At that time , when thousands of the people had come together , in such numbers that they were crushing one another , he said first to his disciples , Have nothing to do with the leaven of the Pharisees , which is deceit .
But nothing is covered up , which will not come to light , or secret , which will not be made clear .
So , whatever you have said in the dark , will come to men's hearing in the light , and what you have said secretly inside the house , will be made public from the house-tops .
And I say to you , my friends , Have no fear of those who may put the body to death , and are able to do no more than that .
But I will make clear to you of whom you are to be in fear : of him who after death has power to send you to hell ; yes , truly I say , Have fear of him .
Are not five sparrows given in exchange for two farthings ? and God has every one of them in mind .
But even the hairs of your head are numbered . Have no fear : you are of more value than a flock of sparrows .
And I say to you that to everyone who gives witness to me before men , the Son of man will give witness before the angels of God .
But if anyone says before men that he has no knowledge of me , I will say that I have no knowledge of him before the angels of God .
And if anyone says a word against the Son of man , he will have forgiveness : but for him who says evil words against the Holy Spirit , there will be no forgiveness .
And when they take you before the Synagogues and the authorities and the rulers , take no thought about what answers you will give , or what you will say :
For the Holy Spirit will make clear to you in that very hour what to say .
And one of the people said to him , Master , give an order to my brother to make division of the heritage with me .
But he said , Man , who made me a judge or a maker of decisions for you ?
And he said to them , Take care to keep yourselves free from the desire for property ; for a man's life is not made up of the number of things which he has .
And he said to them , in a story , The land of a certain man of great wealth was very fertile :
And he said to himself , What is to be done ? for I have no place in which to put all my fruit .
And he said , This I will do : I will take down my store-houses and make greater ones , and there I will put all my grain and my goods .
And I will say to my soul , Soul , you have a great amount of goods in store , enough for a number of years ; be at rest , take food and wine and be happy .
But God said to him , You foolish one , tonight I will take your soul from you , and who then will be the owner of all the things which you have got together ?
So that is what comes to the man who gets wealth for himself , and has not wealth in the eyes of God .
And he said to his disciples , For this reason I say to you , Take no thought for your life , about what food you will take , or for your body , how it may be clothed .
Is not life more than food , and the body than its clothing ?
Give thought to the ravens ; they do not put seeds into the earth , or get together grain ; they have no store-houses or buildings ; and God gives them their food : of how much greater value are you than the birds !
And which of you by taking thought is able to make himself any taller ?
If , then , you are not able to do even that which is least , why are you troubled about the rest ?
Give thought to the flowers : they do no work , they make no thread ; and still I say to you , Even Solomon , in all his glory , was not clothed like one of these .
But if God gives such clothing to the grass in the field , which today is living , and tomorrow will be burned in the oven , how much more will he give clothing to you , O men of little faith ?
And do not give overmuch thought to your food and drink , and let not your mind be full of doubts .
For the nations of the world go in search of all these things : but your Father has knowledge that you have need of them .
But let your chief care be for his kingdom , and these other things will be given to you in addition .
Have no fear , little flock , for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom .
Give what property you have in exchange for money , and give the money to the poor ; make for yourselves money-bags which will not get old , wealth stored up in heaven which will be yours for ever , where thieves will not come nor worms put it to destruction .
For where your wealth is , there will your heart be .
Be ready , dressed as for a journey , with your lights burning .
And be like men who are looking for their lord , when he comes back from the bride-feast ; so that when he comes to the door , it will be open to him quickly .
Happy are those servants who are watching when the lord comes ; truly I say to you , he will make himself their servant and , placing them at the table , he will come out and give them food .
And if he comes in the second division of the night or in the third , and they are watching for him , happy are those servants .
But be certain of this , that if the master of the house had had knowledge of the time when the thief was coming , he would have been watching , and would not have let his house be broken into .
So be ready : for the Son of man is coming at a time when you are not looking for him .
And Peter said to him , Lord , are these words said to us only , or to all men ?
And the Lord said , Who then is the wise and responsible servant whom his lord will put in control of his family , to give them their food at the right time ?
Happy is that servant who , when his lord comes , is doing so .
Truly I say to you , he will put him in control of all his goods .
But if that servant says to himself , My lord is a long time coming ; and goes about giving blows to the men-servants and the women-servants , feasting and taking overmuch wine ;
The lord of that servant will come at a time when he is not looking for him , and at an hour when he is not ready for him , and he will have him cut in two and will give him his part in the fate of those who have no faith ;
And the servant who had knowledge of his lord's desires and was not ready for him and did not do as he was ordered , will be given a great number of blows ;
But he who , without knowledge , did things for which punishment is given , will get only a small number of blows . The man to whom much is given , will have to give much ; if much is given into his care , of him more will be requested .
I came to send a fire on the earth , and it may even now have been lighted .
But there is a baptism which I have to undergo ; and how am I kept back till it is complete !
Is it your opinion that I have come to give peace on earth ? I say to you , No , but division :
For from this time , a family of five in one house will be on opposite sides , three against two and two against three .
They will be at war , the father against his son , and the son against his father ; mother against daughter , and daughter against mother ; mother-in-law against daughter-in-law , and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law .
Then he said to the people , When you see a cloud coming up in the west , straight away you say , There will be rain ; and so it is .
And when you see a south wind blowing , you say , There will be heat ; and so it is .
O false ones ! the face of the earth and the heaven is clear to you ; how is it that the signs of these times are not as clear to you ?
And why are you , in your hearts , unable to be judges of what is right ?
For if anyone has a cause at law against you , and you are going with him before the ruler , make an attempt , on the way , to come to an agreement with him , for if you do not , he may take you before the judge and the judge will give you up to the police , and they will put you in prison .
I say to you , You will not come out of it till you have made payment to the very last farthing .
Now some people who were there at that time , gave him an account of how the blood of some Galilaeans had been mixed by Pilate with their offerings .
And he , in answer , said to them , Are you of the opinion that these Galilaeans were worse than all other Galilaeans , because these things were done to them ?
I say to you , It is not so : but if your hearts are not changed , you will all come to the same end .
Or those eighteen men who were crushed by the fall of the tower of Siloam , were they worse than all the other men living in Jerusalem ?
I say to you , It is not so : but if your hearts are not changed , you will all come to an end in the same way .
And he made up this story for them : A certain man had a fig-tree in his garden , and he came to get fruit from it , and there was no fruit .
And he said to the gardener , See , for three years I have been looking for fruit from this tree , and I have not had any : let it be cut down ; why is it taking up space ?
And he said , Lord , let it be for this year , and I will have the earth turned up round it , and put animal waste on it , to make it fertile :
And if , after that , it has fruit , it is well ; if not , let it be cut down .
And he was teaching in one of the Synagogues on the Sabbath .
And there was a woman who had had a disease for eighteen years ; she was bent , and was not able to make herself straight .
And when Jesus saw her , he said to her , Woman , you are made free from your disease .
And he put his hands on her , and she was made straight , and gave praise to God .
And the ruler of the Synagogue was angry because Jesus had made her well on the Sabbath , and he said to the people , There are six days in which men may do work : so come on those days to be made well , and not on the Sabbath .
But the Lord gave him an answer and said , O you false men ! do you not , every one of you , on the Sabbath , let loose his ox and his ass and take it to the water ?
And is it not right for this daughter of Abraham , who has been in the power of Satan for eighteen years , to be made free on the Sabbath ?
And when he said these things , those who were against him were shamed , and all the people were full of joy because of the great things which were done by him .
Then he said , What is the kingdom of God like ? what comparison may I make of it ?
It is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and put in his garden , and it became a tree , and the birds of heaven made their resting-places in its branches .
And again he said , What is the kingdom of God like ?
It is like leaven , which a woman put into three measures of meal , and it was all leavened .
And he went on his way , through towns and country places , teaching and journeying to Jerusalem .
And someone said to him , Lord , will only a small number have salvation ? And he said to them ,
Do your best to go in by the narrow door , for I say to you , A number will make the attempt to go in , but will not be able to do so .
When the master of the house has got up , and the door has been shut , and you , still outside , give blows on the door , saying , Lord , let us in ; he will make answer and say , I have no knowledge of where you come from .
Then you will say , We have taken food and drink with you , and you were teaching in our streets .
But he will say , Truly , I have no knowledge of you or where you come from ; go away from me , you workers of evil .
There will be weeping and cries of sorrow when you see Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and all the prophets , in the kingdom of God , but you yourselves are shut outside .
And they will come from the east and from the west , from the north and from the south , and take their places in the kingdom of God .
And the last will be first , and the first will be last .
At that time , certain Pharisees came to him and said , Go away from this place , because Herod's purpose is to put you to death .
And he said , Go and say to that fox , I send out evil spirits and do works of mercy today and tomorrow , and on the third day my work will be complete .
But I have to go on my way today and tomorrow and the third day , for it is not right for a prophet to come to his death outside Jerusalem .
O Jerusalem , Jerusalem , putting to death the prophets , and stoning those who were sent to her ! again and again would I have taken your children to myself , as a bird takes her young ones under her wings , but you would not !
Now see , your house is waste , and I say to you , You will not see me again till you say , A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord .
And it came about that when he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees on the Sabbath , to have a meal , they were watching him .
And a certain man was there who had a disease .
And Jesus , answering , said to the scribes and Pharisees , Is it right to make people well on the Sabbath or not ?
But they said nothing . And he made him well and sent him away .
And he said to them , Which of you , whose ox or ass has got into a water-hole , will not straight away get him out on the Sabbath ?
And they had no answer to that question .
And he gave teaching in the form of a story to the guests who came to the feast , when he saw how they took the best seats ; saying to them ,
When you get a request to come to a feast , do not take the best seat , for a more important man than you may be coming ,
And then the giver of the feast will come to you and say , Give your place to this man ; and you , with shame , will have to take the lowest seat .
But when you come , go and take the lowest seat , so that when the giver of the feast comes , he may say to you , Friend , come up higher ; and then you will have honour in the eyes of all the others who are there .
For every man who gives himself a high place will be put down , but he who takes a low place will be lifted up .
And he said to the master of the house , When you give a feast , do not send for your friends and your brothers and your family or your neighbours who have wealth , for they may give a feast for you , and so you will get a reward .
But when you give a feast , send for the poor and the blind and those who are broken in body :
And you will have a blessing , because they will not be able to give you any payment , and you will get your reward when the upright come back from the dead .
And , hearing these words , one of those who were at table with him said to him , Happy is the man who will be a guest in the kingdom of God .
And he said to them , A certain man gave a great feast , and sent word of it to a number of people .
And when the time had come , he sent his servants to say to them , Come , for all things are now ready .
And they all gave reasons why they were not able to come . The first said to him , I have got a new field , and it is necessary for me to go and see it : I am full of regret that I am unable to come .
And another said , I have got some cattle , and I am going to make a test of them : I am full of regret that I am unable to come .
And another said , I have been married , and so I am not able to come .
And the servant came back and gave his master an account of these things . Then the master of the house was angry and said to the servant , Go out quickly into the streets of the town and get the poor , the blind , and those who are broken in body .
And the servant said , Lord , your orders have been done , and still there is room .
And the lord said to the servant , Go out into the roads and the fields , and make them come in , so that my house may be full .
For I say to you that not one of those who were requested to come will have a taste of my feast .
Now a great number of people went with him .
And turning round , he said to them , If any man comes to me , and has not hate for his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters , and even for his life , he may not be my disciple .
Whoever does not take up his cross and come after me may not be my disciple .
For which of you , desiring to put up a tower , does not first give much thought to the price , if he will have enough to make it complete ?
For fear that if he makes a start and is not able to go on with it to the end , all who see it will be laughing at him ,
And saying , This man made a start at building and is not able to make it complete .
Or what king , going to war with another king , will not first take thought if he will be strong enough , with ten thousand men , to keep off him who comes against him with twenty thousand ?
Or while the other is still a great distance away , he sends representatives requesting conditions of peace .
And so whoever is not ready to give up all he has may not be my disciple .
For salt is good , but if the taste goes from it , of what use is it ?
It is no good for the land or for the place of waste ; no one has a use for it . He who has ears , let him give ear .
Now all the tax-farmers and sinners came near to give ear to him .
And the Pharisees and scribes were angry , saying , This man gives approval to sinners , and takes food with them .
And he made a story for them , saying ,
What man of you , having a hundred sheep , if one of them gets loose and goes away , will not let the ninety-nine be in the waste land by themselves , and go after the wandering one , till he sees where it is ?
And when he has got it again , he takes it in his arms with joy .
And when he gets back to his house , he sends for his neighbours and friends , saying to them , Be glad with me , for I have got back my sheep which had gone away .
I say to you that even so there will be more joy in heaven when one sinner is turned away from his wrongdoing , than for ninety-nine good men , who have no need of a change of heart .
Or what woman , having ten bits of silver , if one bit has gone from her hands , will not get a light , and go through her house , searching with care till she sees it ?
And when she has it again , she gets her friends and neighbours together , saying , Be glad with me , for I have got back the bit of silver which had gone from me .
Even so , I say to you , There is joy among the angels of God , when one sinner is turned away from his wrongdoing .
And he said , A certain man had two sons :
And the younger of them said to his father , Father , give me that part of your property which will be mine . And he made division of his goods between them .
And not long after , the younger son got together everything which was his and took a journey into a far-away country , and there all his money went in foolish living .
And when everything was gone , there was no food to be had in that country , and he was in need .
And he went and put himself into the hands of one of the people of that country , and he sent him into his fields to give the pigs their food .
And so great was his need that he would have been glad to take the pigs' food , and no one gave him anything .
But when he came to his senses , he said , What numbers of my father's servants have bread enough , and more , while I am near to death here through need of food !
I will get up and go to my father , and will say to him , Father , I have done wrong , against heaven and in your eyes :
I am no longer good enough to be named your son : make me like one of your servants .
And he got up and went to his father . But while he was still far away , his father saw him and was moved with pity for him and went quickly and took him in his arms and gave him a kiss .
And his son said to him , Father , I have done wrong , against heaven and in your eyes : I am no longer good enough to be named your son .
But the father said to his servants , Get out the first robe quickly , and put it on him , and put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet :
And get the fat young ox and put it to death , and let us have a feast , and be glad .
For this , my son , who was dead , is living again ; he had gone away from me , and has come back . And they were full of joy .
Now the older son was in the field : and when he came near the house , the sounds of music and dancing came to his ears .
And he sent for one of the servants , questioning him about what it might be .
And he said to him , Your brother has come ; and your father has had the young ox put to death because he has come back safely .
But he was angry and would not go in ; and his father came out and made a request to him to come in .
But he made answer and said to his father , See , all these years I have been your servant , doing your orders in everything : and you never gave me even a young goat so that I might have a feast with my friends :
But when this your son came , who has been wasting your property with bad women , you put to death the fat young ox for him .
And he said to him , Son , you are with me at all times , and all I have is yours .
But it was right to be glad and to have a feast ; for this your brother , who was dead , is living again ; he had gone away and has come back .
And another time he said to the disciples , There was a certain man of great wealth who had a servant ; and it was said to him that this servant was wasting his goods .
And he sent for him and said , What is this which is said about you ? give me an account of all you have done , for you will no longer be the manager of my property .
And the servant said to himself , What am I to do now that my lord takes away my position ? I have not enough strength for working in the fields , and I would be shamed if I made requests for money from people in the streets .
I have come to a decision what to do , so that when I am put out of my position they will take me into their houses .
And sending for every one who was in debt to his lord he said to the first , What is the amount of your debt to my lord ?
And he said , A hundred measures of oil . And he said , Take your account straight away and put down fifty .
Then he said to another , What is the amount of your debt ? And he said , A hundred measures of grain . And he said to him , Take your account and put down eighty .
And his lord was pleased with the false servant , because he had been wise ; for the sons of this world are wiser in relation to their generation than the sons of light .
And I say to you , Make friends for yourselves through the wealth of this life , so that when it comes to an end , you may be taken into the eternal resting-places .
He who is true in a little , is true in much ; he who is false in small things , is false in great .
If , then , you have not been true in your use of the wealth of this life , who will give into your care the true wealth ?
And if you have not been true in your care of the property of other people , who will give you that which is yours ?
No man may be a servant to two masters : for he will have hate for the one and love for the other ; or he will keep to the one and have no respect for the other . You may not be servants of God and of wealth .
And the Pharisees , who had a great love of money , hearing these things , were making sport of him .
And he said , You take care to seem right in the eyes of men , but God sees your hearts : and those things which are important in the opinion of men , are evil in the eyes of God .
The law and the prophets were till John : but then came the preaching of the kingdom of God , and everyone makes his way into it by force .
But heaven and earth will come to an end before the smallest letter of the law may be dropped out .
Everyone who puts away his wife and takes another , is a false husband : and he who is married to a woman whose husband has put her away , is no true husband to her .
Now there was a certain man of great wealth , who was dressed in fair clothing of purple and delicate linen , and was shining and glad every day .
And a certain poor man , named Lazarus , was stretched out at his door , full of wounds ,
Desiring the broken bits of food which came from the table of the man of wealth ; and even the dogs came and put their tongues on his wounds .
And in time the poor man came to his end , and angels took him to Abraham's breast . And the man of wealth came to his end , and was put in the earth .
And in hell , being in great pain , lifting up his eyes he saw Abraham , far away , and Lazarus on his breast .
And he gave a cry and said , Father Abraham , have mercy on me and send Lazarus , so that he may put the end of his finger in water and put it on my tongue , for I am cruelly burning in this flame .
But Abraham said , Keep in mind , my son , that when you were living , you had your good things , while Lazarus had evil things : but now , he is comforted and you are in pain .
And in addition , there is a deep division fixed between us and you , so that those who might go from here to you are not able to do so , and no one may come from you to us .
And he said , Father , it is my request that you will send him to my father's house ;
For I have five brothers ; and let him give them an account of these things , so that they may not come to this place of pain .
But Abraham said , They have Moses and the prophets ; let them give ear to what they say .
And he said , No , father Abraham , but if someone went to them from the dead , their hearts would be changed .
And he said to him , If they will not give attention to Moses and the prophets , they will not be moved even if someone comes back from the dead .
And he said to his disciples , It is necessary for causes of trouble to come about , but unhappy is he by whom they come .
It would be well for him if a great stone was put round his neck and he was dropped into the sea , before he made trouble for any of these little ones .
Give attention to yourselves : if your brother does wrong , say a sharp word to him ; and if he has sorrow for his sin , let him have forgiveness .
And if he does you wrong seven times in a day , and seven times comes to you and says , I have regret for what I have done ; let him have forgiveness .
And the twelve said to the Lord , Make our faith greater .
And the Lord said , If your faith was only as great as a grain of mustard seed , you might say to this tree , Be rooted up and planted in the sea ; and it would be done .
But which of you , having a servant who is ploughing or keeping sheep , will say to him , when he comes in from the field , Come now and be seated and have a meal ,
Will he not say , Get a meal for me , and make yourself ready and see to my needs till I have had my food and drink ; and after that you may have yours ?
Does he give praise to the servant because he did what was ordered ?
In the same way , when you have done all the things which are given you to do , say , There is no profit in us , for we have only done what we were ordered to do .
And it came about that when they were on the way to Jerusalem he went through Samaria and Galilee .
And when he went into a certain small town he came across ten men who were lepers , and they , keeping themselves at a distance ,
Said , in loud voices , Jesus , Master , have mercy on us .
And when he saw them he said , Go , and let the priests see you . And , while they were going , they were made clean .
And one of them , when he saw that he was clean , turning back , gave praise to God in a loud voice ;
And , falling down on his face at the feet of Jesus , he gave the credit to him ; and he was a man of Samaria .
And Jesus said , Were there not ten men who were made clean ? where are the nine ?
Have not any of them come back to give glory to God , but only this one from a strange land ?
And he said to him , Get up , and go on your way ; your faith has made you well .
And when the Pharisees put questions to him about when the kingdom of God would come , he gave them an answer and said , The kingdom of God will not come through observation :
And men will not say , See , it is here ! or , There ! for the kingdom of God is among you .
And he said to his disciples , The time will come when you will have a great desire to see one of the days of the Son of man , but you will not see it .
And if they say to you , See , it is there ! or , It is here ! do not go away , or go after them .
For as in a thunderstorm the bright light is seen from one end of the sky to the other , so will the Son of man be when his time comes .
But first , he will have to undergo much and be put on one side by this generation .
And as it was in the days of Noah , so will it be in the day of the Son of man .
They were feasting and taking wives and getting married , till the day of the overflowing of the waters , when Noah went into the ark , and they all came to destruction .
In the same way , in the days of Lot ; they were feasting and trading , they were planting and building ;
But on the day when Lot went out of Sodom , fire came down from heaven and destruction came on them all .
So will it be in the day of the revelation of the Son of man .
On that day , if anyone is on the roof of the house , and his goods are in the house , let him not go down to take them away ; and let him who is in the field not go back to his house .
Keep in mind Lot's wife .
If anyone makes an attempt to keep his life , it will be taken from him , but if anyone gives up his life , he will keep it .
I say to you , In that night there will be two men sleeping in one bed , and one will be taken away and the other let go .
Two women will be crushing grain together ; one will be taken away and the other let go .
Two men will be in the field ; one will be taken and the other left .
And they , answering him , said , Where , Lord ? And he said to them , Where the body is , there will the eagles come together .
And he made a story for them , the point of which was that men were to go on making prayer and not get tired ;
Saying , There was a judge in a certain town , who had no fear of God or respect for man :
And there was a widow in that town , and she kept on coming to him and saying , Give me my right against the man who has done me wrong .
And for a time he would not : but later , he said to himself , Though I have no fear of God or respect for man ,
Because this widow is a trouble to me , I will give her her right ; for if not , I will be completely tired out by her frequent coming .
And the Lord said , Give ear to the words of the evil judge .
And will not God do right in the cause of his saints , whose cries come day and night to his ears , though he is long in doing it ?
I say to you that he will quickly do right in their cause . But when the Son of man comes , will there be any faith on earth ?
And he made this story for some people who were certain that they were good , and had a low opinion of others :
Two men went up to the Temple for prayer ; one a Pharisee , and the other a tax-farmer .
The Pharisee , taking up his position , said to himself these words : God , I give you praise because I am not like other men , who take more than their right , who are evil-doers , who are untrue to their wives , or even like this tax-farmer .
Twice in the week I go without food ; I give a tenth of all I have .
The tax-farmer , on the other hand , keeping far away , and not lifting up even his eyes to heaven , made signs of grief and said , God , have mercy on me , a sinner .
I say to you , This man went back to his house with God's approval , and not the other : for everyone who makes himself high will be made low and whoever makes himself low will be made high .
And they took their children to him , so that he might put his hands on them : but when the disciples saw it , they said sharp words to them
But Jesus sent for them , saying , Let the children come to me , and do not keep them away , for of such is the kingdom of heaven .
Truly I say to you , Whoever does not put himself under the kingdom of God like a little child , will not come into it at all .
And a certain ruler put a question to him , saying , Good Master , what have I to do so that I may have eternal life ?
And Jesus said to him , Why do you say that I am good ? No one is good , but only God .
You have knowledge of what the law says : Do not be untrue to your wife , Do not put anyone to death , Do not take what is not yours , Do not give false witness , Give honour to your father and mother .
And he said , All these things I have done from the time when I was a boy .
And Jesus , hearing it , said to him , One thing you still have need of ; get money for your goods , and give it away to the poor , and you will have wealth in heaven ; and come after me .
But at these words he became very sad , for he had great wealth .
And Jesus , looking at him , said , How hard it is for those who have wealth to get into the kingdom of God !
It is simpler for a camel to go through the eye of a needle , than for a man who has much money to come into the kingdom of God .
And those who were present said , Then who may have salvation ?
But he said , Things which are not possible with man are possible with God .
And Peter said , See , we have given up what is ours to come after you .
And he said to them , Truly I say to you , There is no man who has given up house or wife or brothers or father or mother or children , because of the kingdom of God ,
Who will not get much more in this time , and in the world to come , eternal life .
And he took with him the twelve and said to them , Now we are going up to Jerusalem , and all the things which were said by the prophets will be done to the Son of man .
For he will be given up to the Gentiles , and will be made sport of and put to shame :
And he will be given cruel blows and put to death , and on the third day he will come back to life .
But they did not take in the sense of any of these words , and what he said was not clear to them , and their minds were not able to see it .
And it came about that when he got near Jericho , a certain blind man was seated by the side of the road , making requests for money from those who went by .
And hearing the sound of a great number of people going by , he said , What is this ?
And they said to him , Jesus of Nazareth is going by .
And he said in a loud voice , Jesus , Son of David , have mercy on me .
And those who were in front made protests and said to him , Be quiet : but he said all the more , O Son of David , have mercy on me .
And Jesus , stopping , gave orders that he was to come to him , and when he came near , he said to him ,
What would you have me do for you ? And he said , Lord , that I may be able to see again .
And Jesus said , See again : your faith has made you well .
And straight away he was able to see , and he went after him , giving glory to God ; and all the people when they saw it gave praise to God .
And he went into Jericho , and when he was going through it ,
A man , named Zacchaeus , who was the chief tax-farmer , and a man of wealth ,
Made an attempt to get a view of Jesus , and was not able to do so , because of the people , for he was a small man .
And he went quickly in front of them and got up into a tree to see him , for he was going that way .
And when Jesus came to the place , looking up , he said to him , Zacchaeus , be quick and come down , for I am coming to your house today .
And he came down quickly , and took him into his house with joy .
And when they saw it , they were all angry , saying , He has gone into the house of a sinner .
And Zacchaeus , waiting before him , said to the Lord , See , Lord , half of my goods I give to the poor , and if I have taken anything from anyone wrongly , I give him back four times as much .
And Jesus said to him , Today salvation has come to this house , for even he is a son of Abraham .
For the Son of man came to make search for those who are wandering from the way , and to be their Saviour .
And while they were giving ear to these words , he made another story for them , because he was near Jerusalem , and because they were of the opinion that the kingdom of God was coming straight away .
So he said , A certain man of high birth went into a far-away country to get a kingdom for himself , and to come back .
And he sent for ten of his servants and gave them ten pounds and said to them , Do business with this till I come .
But his people had no love for him , and sent representatives after him , saying , We will not have this man for our ruler .
And when he came back again , having got his kingdom , he gave orders for those servants to whom he had given the money to come to him , so that he might have an account of what business they had done .
And the first came before him , saying , Lord , your pound has made ten pounds .
And he said to him , You have done well , O good servant : because you have done well in a small thing you will have authority over ten towns .
And another came , saying , Your pound has made five pounds .
And he said , You will be ruler over five towns .
And another came , saying , Lord , here is your pound , which I put away in a cloth ;
Because I was in fear of you , for you are a hard man : you take up what you have not put down , and get in grain where you have not put seed .
He said to him , By the words of your mouth you will be judged , you bad servant . You had knowledge that I am a hard man , taking up what I have not put down and getting in grain where I have not put seed ;
Why then did you not put my money in a bank , so that when I came I would get it back with interest ?
And he said to the others who were near , Take the pound away from him , and give it to the man who has ten .
And they say to him , Lord , he has ten pounds .
And I say to you that to everyone who has , more will be given , but from him who has not , even what he has will be taken away .
And as for those who were against me , who would not have me for their ruler , let them come here , and be put to death before me .
And when he had said this , he went on in front of them , going up to Jerusalem .
And it came about that when he got near Beth-phage and Bethany by the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives , he sent two of the disciples ,
Saying , Go into the little town in front of you , and on going in you will see a young ass fixed with a cord , on which no man has ever been seated ; let him loose and take him .
And if anyone says to you , Why are you taking him ? say , The Lord has need of him .
And those whom he sent went away , and it was as he said .
And when they were getting the young ass , the owners of it said to them , Why are you taking the young ass ?
And they said , The Lord has need of him .
And they took him to Jesus , and they put their clothing on the ass , and Jesus got on to him .
And while he went on his way they put their clothing down on the road in front of him .
And when he came near the foot of the Mountain of Olives , all the disciples with loud voices gave praise to God with joy , because of all the great works which they had seen ;
Saying , A blessing on the King who comes in the name of the Lord ; peace in heaven and glory in the highest .
And some of the Pharisees among the people said to him , Master , make your disciples be quiet .
And he said in answer , I say to you , if these men keep quiet , the very stones will be crying out .
And when he got near and saw the town , he was overcome with weeping for it ,
Saying , If you , even you , had knowledge today , of the things which give peace ! but you are not able to see them .
For the time will come when your attackers will put a wall round you , and come all round you and keep you in on every side ,
And will make you level with the earth , and your children with you ; and there will not be one stone resting on another in you , because you did not see that it was your day of mercy .
And he went into the Temple and put out those who were trading there ,
Saying to them , It has been said , My house is to be a house of prayer , but you have made it a hole of thieves .
And every day he was teaching in the Temple . But the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people were attempting to put him to death ;
But they were not able to do anything , because the people all kept near him , being greatly interested in his words .
And it came about on one of those days , when he was teaching the people in the Temple and preaching the good news ,
That the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people came to him and said , Make clear to us by what authority you do these things and who gave you this authority .
And in answer he said to them , I will put a question to you , and do you give me an answer :
The baptism of John , was it from heaven or of men ?
And they said among themselves , If we say , From heaven ; he will say , Why did you not have faith in him ?
But if we say , Of men ; we will be stoned by the people , for they are certain that John was a prophet .
And they made answer that they had no idea where it came from .
And Jesus said , And I will not make clear to you by what authority I do these things .
And he gave the people this story : A man made a vine-garden and gave the use of it to some field-workers and went into another country for a long time .
And at the right time he sent a servant to the workers to get part of the fruit from the vines ; but the workmen gave him blows and sent him away with nothing .
And he sent another servant , and they gave blows to him in the same way , and put shame on him , and sent him away with nothing .
And he sent a third , and they gave him wounds and put him out .
And the lord of the garden said , What am I to do ? I will send my dearly loved son ; they may give respect to him .
But when the workmen saw him , they said to one another , This is he who will one day be the owner of the property : let us put him to death and the heritage will be ours .
And driving him out of the garden they put him to death . Now what will the lord do to these workmen ?
He will come and put them to destruction and give the garden to others . And when he said this , they said , May it not be so .
But he , looking on them , said , Is it not in the Writings , The stone which the builders put on one side , the same has become the chief stone of the building ?
Everyone falling on that stone will be broken , but the man on whom the stone comes down will be crushed to dust .
And the chief priests and the scribes made attempts to get their hands on him in that very hour ; and they were in fear of the people , for they saw that he had made up this story against them .
And they kept watch on him , and sent out secret representatives , who were acting the part of good men , in order that they might get something from his words , on account of which they might give him up to the government and into the power of the ruler .
And they put a question to him , saying , Master , we are certain that your teaching and your words are right , and that you have no respect for a man's position , but you are teaching the true way of God :
Is it right for us to make payment of taxes to Caesar or not ?
But he saw through their trick and said to them ,
Let me see a penny . Whose image and name are on it ? And they said , Caesar's .
And he said , Then give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's , and to God the things which are God's .
And they were not able to get anything from these words before the people : but they were full of wonder at his answer , and said nothing .
And some of the Sadducees came to him , who say that there is no coming back from the dead ; and they said to him ,
Master , Moses said that if a man's brother comes to his end , having a wife , but no children , his brother is to take the wife , and get a family for his brother .
Now there were seven brothers , and the first had a wife and came to his end , having no children ;
And the second ;
And the third took her ; and in the same way , all the seven , without having any children , came to their end .
And last of all , the woman came to her end .
When they come back from the dead , whose wife will she be ? for all the seven had her .
And Jesus said to them , The sons of this world are married and have wives ;
But those to whom is given the reward of the world to come , and to come back from the dead , have no wives , and are not married ;
And death has no more power over them , for they are equal to the angels , and are sons of God , being of those who will come back from the dead .
But even Moses made it clear that the dead come back to life , saying , in the story of the burning thorn-tree , The Lord , the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob .
Now he is not the God of the dead but of the living : for all men are living to him .
And some of the scribes , in answer to this , said , Master , you have said well .
And they had fear of putting any more questions to him .
And he said to them , Why do they say that the Christ is the son of David ?
For David himself says in the book of Psalms , The Lord said to my Lord , Take your seat at my right hand ,
Till I put under your feet all those who are against you .
David then gives him the name of Lord , so how is it possible for him to be his son ?
And in the hearing of all the people he said to his disciples ,
Keep away from the scribes , whose pleasure it is to go about in long robes , and to have words of respect said to them in the market-places , and to take the chief seats in the Synagogues and the first places at feasts ;
Who take the property of widows and before the eyes of men make long prayers ; they will get a greater punishment .
And looking up , he saw the men of wealth putting their offerings in the money-box .
And he saw a certain poor widow putting in a farthing .
And he said , Truly I say to you , This poor widow has given more than all of them :
For they gave out of their wealth , having more than enough for themselves : but she , even out of her need , has put in all her living .
And some were talking about the Temple , how it was made fair with beautiful stones and with offerings , but he said ,
As for these things which you see , the days will come when not one stone will be resting on another , but all will be broken down .
And they said to him , Master , when will these things be ? and what sign will there be when these events are to take place ?
And he said , Take care that you are not tricked : for a number of people will come in my name , saying , I am he ; and , The time is near : do not go after them .
And when news of wars and troubled times comes to your ears , have no fear ; for these things have to be , but the end will not be now .
Then he said to them , Nation will be moved against nation and kingdom against kingdom :
There will be great earth-shocks and outbursts of disease in a number of places , and men will be without food ; and there will be wonders and great signs from heaven .
But before all this , they will take you and be very cruel to you , giving you up to the Synagogues and to prisons , taking you before kings and rulers , because of my name .
And it will be turned to a witness for you .
So take care not to be troubled before the time comes , about what answers you will give :
For I will give you words and wisdom , so that not one of those who are against you will be able to get the better of you , or to put you in the wrong .
But you will be given up even by your fathers and mothers , your brothers and relations and friends ; and some of you will be put to death .
And you will be hated by all men , because of me .
But not a hair of your head will come to destruction .
By going through all these things , you will keep your lives .
But when you see armies all round about Jerusalem , then be certain that her destruction is near .
Then let those who are in Judaea go in flight to the mountains ; and those who are in the middle of the town go out ; and let not those who are in the country come in .
For these are the days of punishment , in which all the things in the Writings will be put into effect .
It will be hard for women who are with child , and for her with a baby at the breast , in those days . For great trouble will come on the land , and wrath on this people .
And they will be put to death with the sword , and will be taken as prisoners into all the nations ; and Jerusalem will be crushed under the feet of the Gentiles , till the times of the Gentiles are complete .
And there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars ; and on the earth , fear among the nations and doubt because of the loud noise of the sea and the waves ;
Men's strength will go from them in fear and in waiting for the things which are coming on the earth ; for the powers of the heavens will be moved .
And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud , with power and great glory .
But when these things come about , let your heads be lifted up , because your salvation is near .
And he made a story for them : See the fig-tree , and all the trees ;
When they put out their young leaves , you take note of it , and it is clear to you that summer is coming .
In the same way , when you see these things taking place you may be certain that the kingdom of God is near .
Truly I say to you , This generation will not come to an end till all things are complete .
Heaven and earth will come to an end , but my words will not come to an end .
But give attention to yourselves , for fear that your hearts become over-full of the pleasures of food and wine , and the cares of this life , and that day may come on you suddenly , and take you as in a net :
For so it will come on all those who are living on the face of all the earth .
But keep watch at all times with prayer , that you may be strong enough to come through all these things and take your place before the Son of man .
And every day he was teaching in the Temple and every night he went out to the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives to take his rest .
And all the people came early in the morning to give ear to his words in the Temple .
Now the feast of unleavened bread was near , which is called the Passover .
And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a chance to put him to death , but they went in fear of the people .
And Satan came into Judas Iscariot , who was one of the twelve .
And he went away and had a discussion with the chief priests and the rulers , about how he might give him up to them .
And they were glad , and undertook to give him money .
And he made an agreement with them to give him up to them , if he got a chance , when the people were not present .
And the day of unleavened bread came , when the Passover lamb is put to death .
And Jesus sent Peter and John , saying , Go and make the Passover ready for us , so that we may take it .
And they said to him , Where are we to get it ready ?
And he said to them , When you go into the town you will see a man coming to you with a vessel of water ; go after him into the house into which he goes .
And say to the master of the house , The Master says , Where is the guest-room , where I may take the Passover with my disciples ?
And he will take you up to a great room with a table and seats : there make ready .
And they went , and it was as he had said : and they made the Passover ready .
And when the time had come , he took his seat , and the Apostles with him .
And he said , I have had a great desire to keep this Passover with you before I come to my death ;
For I say to you , I will not take it till it is made complete in the kingdom of God .
And he took a cup and , having given praise , he said , Make division of this among yourselves ;
For I say to you , I will not take of the fruit of the vine till the kingdom of God has come .
And he took bread and , having given praise , he gave it to them when it had been broken , saying , This is my body , which is given for you : do this in memory of me .
And in the same way , after the meal , he took the cup , saying , This cup is the new testament , made with my blood which is given for you .
But the hand of him who is false to me is with me at the table .
For it will be done to the Son of man after the purpose of God , but unhappy is that man by whom he is given up .
And they were wondering among themselves which of them it was who would do this thing .
And there was an argument among them about which of them was the greatest .
And he said , The kings of the Gentiles are lords over them , and those who have authority are given names of honour .
But let it not be so with you ; but he who is greater , let him become like the younger ; and he who is chief , like a servant .
For which is greater , the guest who is seated at a meal or the servant who is waiting on him ? is it not the guest ? but I am among you as a servant .
But you are those who have kept with me through my troubles ;
And I will give you a kingdom as my Father has given one to me ,
So that you may take food and drink at my table in my kingdom , and be seated like kings , judging the twelve tribes of Israel .
Simon , Simon , Satan has made a request to have you , so that he may put you to the test as grain is tested :
But I have made prayer for you , that your faith may not go from you : and when you are turned again , make your brothers strong .
And he said to him , Lord , I am ready to go with you to prison and to death .
And he said , I say to you , Peter , before the cock's second cry today , you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me .
And he said to them , When I sent you out without money or bag or shoes , were you in need of anything ? And they said , Nothing .
And he said to them , But now , he who has a money-bag , or a bag for food , let him take it : and he who has not , let him give his coat for money and get a sword .
For I say to you that these words will be put into effect in me , And he was numbered among the evil-doers : for what has been said in the Writings about me has an end .
And they said , Lord , here are two swords . And he said , It is enough .
And he came out , and went , as his way was , to the Mountain of Olives , and the disciples went with him .
And when he came to the place , he said to them , Make a prayer that you may not be put to the test .
And he went a little distance away from them and , falling on his knees in prayer , he said ,
Father , if it is your pleasure , take this cup from me : but still , let your pleasure , not mine , be done .
And an angel from heaven came to him , to give him strength .
And being in great trouble of soul , the force of his prayer became stronger , and great drops , like blood , came from him , falling to the earth .
And , getting up from prayer , he came to the disciples , and saw that they were sleeping for sorrow .
And he said , Why are you sleeping ? Get up , and give yourselves to prayer , so that you may not be put to the test .
And while he was saying these words , there came a band of people , and Judas , one of the twelve , was in front of them , and he came near to Jesus to give him a kiss .
But Jesus said to him , Judas , will you be false to the Son of man with a kiss ?
And when those who were with him saw what was coming , they said , Lord , may we not make use of our swords ?
And one of them gave a blow to the servant of the high priest , cutting off his right ear .
But Jesus , answering , said , Put up with this , at least . And touching his ear , he made it well .
And Jesus said to the chief priests and the captains of the Temple and the rulers , who had come against him , Have you come out as against a thief , with swords and sticks ?
When I was in the Temple with you every day , your hands were not stretched out against me : but this is your hour , and the authority of the dark power .
And they made him a prisoner and took him away to the house of the high priest . But Peter went after them at a distance .
And a fire was lighted in the middle of the open square , and they were seated together , and Peter was among them .
And a certain woman-servant , seeing him in the light of the fire , and looking at him with attention , said , This man was with him .
But he said , Woman , it is not true ; I have no knowledge of him .
And after a little time , another saw him and said , You are one of them ; and he said , Man , I am not .
And after about an hour , another man said , with decision , Certainly this man was with him , for he is a Galilaean .
And Peter said , Man , I have no knowledge of these things of which you are talking . And straight away , while he was saying these words , there came the cry of a cock .
And the Lord , turning , gave Peter a look . And the words of the Lord came to Peter's mind , how he had said , This night , before the hour of the cock's cry , you will be false to me three times .
And he went out , weeping bitterly .
And the men in whose hands Jesus was , made sport of him and gave him blows .
And , covering his eyes , they said to him , Are you prophet enough to say who gave you that blow ?
And they said a number of other evil things against him .
And when it was day , the rulers of the people came together , with the chief priests and the scribes , and they took him before their Sanhedrin , saying ,
If you are the Christ , say so . But he said , If I say so you will not have belief ;
And if I put a question to you , you will not give an answer .
But in the future the Son of man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God .
And they all said , Are you then the Son of God ? and he said , You say that I am .
And they said , What more need have we of witness ? we have the very words of his mouth .
And they all went and took him before Pilate .
And they made statements against him , saying , This man has to our knowledge been teaching our nation to do wrong , and not to make payment of taxes to Caesar , even saying that he himself is Christ , a king .
And Pilate said to him , Are you the King of the Jews ? And he said in answer , You say so .
And Pilate said to the chief priests and the people , In my opinion this man has done no wrong .
But they became more violent than before , saying , He has made trouble among the people , teaching through all Judaea from Galilee to this place .
But at these words Pilate said , Is the man a Galilaean ?
And when he saw that he was under the authority of Herod , he sent him to Herod , who was in Jerusalem himself at that time .
Now when Herod saw Jesus he was very glad , having for a long time had a desire to see him , for he had had accounts of him , and was hoping to see some wonders done by him .
And he put a great number of questions to him , but he said nothing .
And the chief priests and the scribes were there , making statements against him violently .
And Herod , with the men of his army , put shame on him and made sport of him , and dressing him in shining robes , he sent him back to Pilate .
And that day Herod and Pilate became friends with one another , for before they had been against one another .
And Pilate sent for the chief priests and the rulers and the people , and said to them ,
You say that this man has been teaching the people evil things : now I , after going into the question before you , see nothing wrong in this man in connection with the things which you have said against him :
And Herod is of the same opinion , for he has sent him back to us ; for , you see , he has done nothing for which I might put him to death .
And so I will give him punishment and let him go .
[]
But with loud voices they said all together , Put this man to death , and make Barabbas free .
Now this man was in prison because of an attack against the government in the town , in which there had been loss of life .
And Pilate again said to them that it was his desire to let Jesus go free .
But crying out they said , To the cross with him !
And he said to them a third time , Why , what evil has he done ? I see no reason for putting him to death : I will give him punishment and let him go .
But they went on crying out loudly , Let him be put to death on the cross . And they had their way .
And Pilate gave his decision for their desire to be put into effect .
And in answer to their request , he let that man go free who had been in prison for acting against the government and causing death , and Jesus he gave up to their pleasure .
And while they were taking him away , they put their hands on Simon of Cyrene , who was coming from the country , and made him take the cross after Jesus .
And a great band of people went after him , and of women making signs of grief and weeping for him .
But Jesus , turning to them , said , Daughters of Jerusalem , let not your weeping be for me , but for yourselves and for your children .
For the days are coming in which they will say , Happy are those who have had no children , whose bodies have never given birth , whose breasts have never given milk .
And they will say to the mountains , Come down on us , and to the hills , Be a cover over us .
For if they do these things when the tree is green , what will they do when it is dry ?
And two others , evil-doers , were taken with him to be put to death .
And when they came to the place which is named Golgotha , they put him on the cross , and the evil-doers , one on the right side , and the other on the left .
And Jesus said , Father , let them have forgiveness , for they have no knowledge of what they are doing . And they made division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance .
And the people were looking on . And the rulers made sport of him , saying , He was a saviour of others ; let him do something for himself , if he is the Christ , the man of God's selection .
And the men of the army made sport of him , coming to him and giving him bitter wine ,
And saying , If you are the King of the Jews , get yourself free .
And these words were put in writing over him , THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS .
And one of the evil-doers on the cross , with bitter feeling , said to him , Are you not the Christ ? Get yourself and us out of this .
But the other , protesting , said , Have you no fear of God ? for you have a part in the same punishment ,
And with reason ; for we have the right reward of our acts , but this man has done nothing wrong .
And he said , Jesus , keep me in mind when you come in your kingdom .
And he said to him , Truly I say to you , Today you will be with me in Paradise .
And it was now about the sixth hour ; and all the land was dark till the ninth hour ;
The light of the sun went out , and the curtain in the Temple was parted in two .
And Jesus gave a loud cry and said , Father , into your hands I give my spirit : and when he had said this , he gave up his spirit .
And when the captain saw what was done , he gave praise to God , saying , Without doubt this was an upright man .
And all the people who had come together to see it , when they saw the things which were done , went back again making signs of grief .
And all his friends and the women who came with him from Galilee , were waiting at a distance , watching these things .
Now there was a man named Joseph , a man of authority and a good and upright man
(He had not given his approval to their decision or their acts) , of Arimathaea , a town of the Jews , who was waiting for the kingdom of God :
This man went to Pilate and made a request for the body of Jesus .
And he took it down , and folding it in a linen cloth , he put it in a place cut in the rock for a dead body ; and no one had ever been put in it .
Now it was the day of making ready and the Sabbath was coming on .
And the women who had come with him from Galilee went after him and saw the place and how his body had been put to rest ;
And they went back and got ready spices and perfumes ; and on the Sabbath they took their rest , in agreement with the law .
But on the first day of the week , at dawn , they came to the place where his body had been put , taking the spices which they had got ready .
And they saw that the stone had been rolled away .
And they went in , but the body of the Lord Jesus was not there .
And while they were in doubt about it , they saw two men in shining clothing by them :
And while their faces were bent down to the earth in fear , these said to them , Why are you looking for the living among the dead ?
He is not here , he has come back to life : have in mind what he said to you when he was still in Galilee , saying ,
The Son of man will be given up into the hands of evil-doers , and be put to death on the cross , and on the third day he will come back to life .
And his words came back into their minds ,
And they went away from that place and gave an account of all these things to the eleven disciples and all the others .
Now they were Mary Magdalene , and Joanna , and Mary , the mother of James : and the other women with them said these things to the Apostles .
But these words seemed foolish to them , and they had no belief in them .
But Peter got up and went to the place where the body had been put , and looking in he saw nothing but the linen cloths , and he went to his house full of wonder at what had taken place .
And then , two of them , on that very day , were going to a little town named Emmaus , which was about seven miles from Jerusalem .
And they were talking together about all those things which had taken place .
And while they were talking and questioning together , Jesus himself came near and went with them .
But their eyes were not open that they might have knowledge of him .
And he said to them , What are you talking about together while you go ?
Then stopping , and looking sadly at him , one of them , named Cleopas , said to him , Are you the only man living in Jerusalem who has not had news of the things which have taken place there at this time ?
And he said to them , What things ? And they said , The things to do with Jesus of Nazareth , who was a prophet , great in his acts and his words , before God and all the people :
And how the chief priests and our rulers gave him up to be put to death on the cross .
But we were hoping that he would be the Saviour of Israel . In addition to all this he has now let three days go by from the time when these things took place ;
And certain women among us gave us cause for wonder , for they went early to the place where his body had been put ,
And it was not there ; then they came saying that they had seen a vision of angels who said that he was living .
And some of those who were with us went to the place , and saw that it was as the women had said , but him they did not see .
And he said , O foolish men ! how slow you are to give belief to what the prophets have said .
Was it not necessary for the Christ to go through these things , and to come into his glory ?
And he made clear to them all the things in the Writings , from Moses and from all the prophets , which had to do with himself .
And they came near the town to which they were going , and he seemed as if he was going on ;
But they kept him back , saying , Do not go , for evening is near , the day is almost gone . And he went in with them .
And when he was seated with them at table , he took the bread , and said words of blessing and , making division of it , he gave it to them .
And then their eyes were open , and they had knowledge of him , but he went from their view .
And they said to one another , Were not our hearts burning in us while he was talking to us on the way , making clear to us the holy Writings ?
And that very hour they got up and went back to Jerusalem , where the eleven and the others had come together .
And they said to them , The Lord has truly come back to life again , and Simon has seen him .
And they gave an account of the things which had taken place on the way , and how , when he gave them bread , they had knowledge of him .
And while they were saying these things , he himself was among them , and said to them , Peace be with you !
But they were full of fear , being of the opinion that they were seeing a spirit .
And he said to them , Why are you troubled , and why are your hearts full of doubt ?
See ; my hands and my feet : it is I myself ; put your hands on me and make certain ; for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see that I have .
And when he had said this , he let them see his hands and his feet .
And because , for joy and wonder , they were still in doubt , he said to them , Have you any food here ?
And they gave him a bit of cooked fish .
And before their eyes he took a meal .
And he said to them , These are the words which I said to you when I was still with you , how it was necessary for all the things which are in the writings of Moses and the prophets and in the Psalms about me , to be put into effect .
Then he made the holy Writings clear to their minds .
And he said to them , So it is in the Writings that the Christ would undergo death , and come back to life again on the third day ;
And that teaching about a change of heart and forgiveness of sins is to be given to Jerusalem first and to all nations in his name .
You are witnesses of these things .
And now I will send to you what my father has undertaken to give you , but do not go from the town , till the power from heaven comes to you .
And he took them out till they were near Bethany , and lifting up his hands , he gave them a blessing .
And while he was doing so , he went from them and was taken up into heaven .
And they gave him worship and went back to Jerusalem with great joy .
And they were in the Temple at all times , giving praise to God .
Galatians .
Paul , an apostle—sent not from men nor by a man , but by Jesus Christ and God the Father , who raised him from the dead—
and all the brothers and sisters[a] with me , To the churches in Galatia :
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ , 
who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from the present evil age , according to the will of our God and Father ,
to whom be glory for ever and ever . Amen .
I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you to live in the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel— 
which is really no gospel at all . Evidently some people are throwing you into confusion and are trying to pervert the gospel of Christ . 
But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel other than the one we preached to you , let them be under God’s curse !
As we have already said , so now I say again : If anybody is preaching to you a gospel other than what you accepted , let them be under God’s curse !
Am I now trying to win the approval of human beings , or of God ? Or am I trying to please people ? If I were still trying to please people , I would not be a servant of Christ .
I want you to know , brothers and sisters , that the gospel I preached is not of human origin . 
I did not receive it from any man , nor was I taught it ; rather , I received it by revelation from Jesus Christ .
For you have heard of my previous way of life in Judaism , how intensely I persecuted the church of God and tried to destroy it . 
I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my own age among my people and was extremely zealous for the traditions of my fathers . 
But when God , who set me apart from my mother’s womb and called me by his grace , was pleased 
to reveal his Son in me so that I might preach him among the Gentiles , my immediate response was not to consult any human being .
I did not go up to Jerusalem to see those who were apostles before I was , but I went into Arabia . Later I returned to Damascus .
Then after three years , I went up to Jerusalem to get acquainted with Cephas[b] and stayed with him fifteen days .
I saw none of the other apostles—only James , the Lord’s brother . 
I assure you before God that what I am writing you is no lie .
Then I went to Syria and Cilicia . 
I was personally unknown to the churches of Judea that are in Christ . 
They only heard the report : “The man who formerly persecuted us is now preaching the faith he once tried to destroy .” 
And they praised God because of me .
Then after fourteen years , I went up again to Jerusalem , this time with Barnabas . I took Titus along also . 
I went in response to a revelation and , meeting privately with those esteemed as leaders , I presented to them the gospel that I preach among the Gentiles . I wanted to be sure I was not running and had not been running my race in vain .
Yet not even Titus , who was with me , was compelled to be circumcised , even though he was a Greek . 
This matter arose because some false believers had infiltrated our ranks to spy on the freedom we have in Christ Jesus and to make us slaves .
We did not give in to them for a moment , so that the truth of the gospel might be preserved for you .
As for those who were held in high esteem—whatever they were makes no difference to me ; God does not show favoritism—they added nothing to my message . 
On the contrary , they recognized that I had been entrusted with the task of preaching the gospel to the uncircumcised ,just as Peter had been to the circumcised .
For God , who was at work in Peter as an apostle to the circumcised , was also at work in me as an apostle to the Gentiles . 
James , Cephas and John , those esteemed as pillars , gave me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship when they recognized the grace given to me . They agreed that we should go to the Gentiles , and they to the circumcised . 
All they asked was that we should continue to remember the poor , the very thing I had been eager to do all along .
When Cephas came to Antioch , I opposed him to his face , because he stood condemned . 
For before certain men came from James , he used to eat with the Gentiles . But when they arrived , he began to draw back and separate himself from the Gentiles because he was afraid of those who belonged to the circumcision group . 
The other Jews joined him in his hypocrisy , so that by their hypocrisy even Barnabas was led astray .
When I saw that they were not acting in line with the truth of the gospel , I said to Cephas in front of them all , “You are a Jew , yet you live like a Gentile and not like a Jew . How is it , then , that you force Gentiles to follow Jewish customs ?
“We who are Jews by birth and not sinful Gentiles 
know that a person is not justified by the works of the law , but by faith in Jesus Christ . So we , too , have put our faith in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law , because by the works of the law no one will be justified .
“But if , in seeking to be justified in Christ , we Jews find ourselves also among the sinners , doesn’t that mean that Christ promotes sin ? Absolutely not ! 
If I rebuild what I destroyed , then I really would be a lawbreaker .
“For through the law I died to the law so that I might live for God . 
I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live , but Christ lives in me . The life I now live in the body , I live by faith in the Son of God , who loved me and gave himself for me . 
I do not set aside the grace of God , for if righteousness could be gained through the law , Christ died for nothing !”
You foolish Galatians ! Who has bewitched you ? Before your very eyes Jesus Christ was clearly portrayed as crucified . 
I would like to learn just one thing from you : Did you receive the Spirit by the works of the law , or by believing what you heard ? 
Are you so foolish ? After beginning by means of the Spirit , are you now trying to finish by means of the flesh ?
Have you experienced so much in vain—if it really was in vain ?
So again I ask , does God give you his Spirit and work miracles among you by the works of the law , or by your believing what you heard ? 
So also Abraham “believed God , and it was credited to him as righteousness .”
Understand , then , that those who have faith are children of Abraham .
Scripture foresaw that God would justify the Gentiles by faith , and announced the gospel in advance to Abraham : “All nations will be blessed through you .”
So those who rely on faith are blessed along with Abraham , the man of faith .
For all who rely on the works of the law are under a curse , as it is written : “Cursed is everyone who does not continue to do everything written in the Book of the Law .”
Clearly no one who relies on the law is justified before God , because “the righteous will live by faith .”
The law is not based on faith ; on the contrary , it says , “The person who does these things will live by them .”
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us , for it is written : “Cursed is everyone who is hung on a pole .”
He redeemed us in order that the blessing given to Abraham might come to the Gentiles through Christ Jesus , so that by faith we might receive the promise of the Spirit .
Brothers and sisters , let me take an example from everyday life . Just as no one can set aside or add to a human covenant that has been duly established , so it is in this case . 
The promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed . Scripture does not say “and to seeds ,” meaning many people , but “and to your seed ,” meaning one person , who is Christ .
What I mean is this : The law , introduced 430 years later , does not set aside the covenant previously established by God and thus do away with the promise . 
For if the inheritance depends on the law , then it no longer depends on the promise ; but God in his grace gave it to Abraham through a promise .
Why , then , was the law given at all ? It was added because of transgressions until the Seed to whom the promise referred had come . The law was given through angels and entrusted to a mediator . 
A mediator , however , implies more than one party ; but God is one .
Is the law , therefore , opposed to the promises of God ? Absolutely not ! For if a law had been given that could impart life , then righteousness would certainly have come by the law . 
But Scripture has locked up everything under the control of sin , so that what was promised , being given through faith in Jesus Christ , might be given to those who believe .
Before the coming of this faith , we were held in custody under the law , locked up until the faith that was to come would be revealed . 
So the law was our guardian until Christ came that we might be justified by faith .
Now that this faith has come , we are no longer under a guardian .
So in Christ Jesus you are all children of God through faith , 
for all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ . 
There is neither Jew nor Gentile , neither slave nor free , nor is there male and female , for you are all one in Christ Jesus .
If you belong to Christ , then you are Abraham’s seed , and heirs according to the promise .
What I am saying is that as long as an heir is underage , he is no different from a slave , although he owns the whole estate .
The heir is subject to guardians and trustees until the time set by his father . 
So also , when we were underage , we were in slavery under the elemental spiritual forces of the world .
But when the set time had fully come , God sent his Son , born of a woman , born under the law , 
to redeem those under the law , that we might receive adoption to sonship .
Because you are his sons , God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts , the Spirit who calls out , “Abba , Father .” 
So you are no longer a slave , but God’s child ; and since you are his child , God has made you also an heir .
Formerly , when you did not know God , you were slaves to those who by nature are not gods .
But now that you know God—or rather are known by God—how is it that you are turning back to those weak and miserable forces ? Do you wish to be enslaved by them all over again ? 
You are observing special days and months and seasons and years ! 
I fear for you , that somehow I have wasted my efforts on you .
I plead with you , brothers and sisters , become like me , for I became like you . You did me no wrong . 
As you know , it was because of an illness that I first preached the gospel to you ,
and even though my illness was a trial to you , you did not treat me with contempt or scorn . Instead , you welcomed me as if I were an angel of God , as if I were Christ Jesus himself . 
Where , then , is your blessing of me now ? I can testify that , if you could have done so , you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me .
Have I now become your enemy by telling you the truth ?
Those people are zealous to win you over , but for no good . What they want is to alienate you from us , so that you may have zeal for them . 
It is fine to be zealous , provided the purpose is good , and to be so always , not just when I am with you . 
My dear children , for whom I am again in the pains of childbirth until Christ is formed in you , 
how I wish I could be with you now and change my tone , because I am perplexed about you !
Tell me , you who want to be under the law , are you not aware of what the law says ? 
For it is written that Abraham had two sons , one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman .
His son by the slave woman was born according to the flesh , but his son by the free woman was born as the result of a divine promise .
These things are being taken figuratively : The women represent two covenants . One covenant is from Mount Sinai and bears children who are to be slaves : This is Hagar .
Now Hagar stands for Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present city of Jerusalem , because she is in slavery with her children . 
But the Jerusalem that is above is free , and she is our mother . 
For it is written : “Be glad , barren woman , you who never bore a child ; shout for joy and cry aloud , you who were never in labor ; because more are the children of the desolate woman than of her who has a husband .”
Now you , brothers and sisters , like Isaac , are children of promise . 
At that time the son born according to the flesh persecuted the son born by the power of the Spirit . It is the same now .
But what does Scripture say ? “Get rid of the slave woman and her son , for the slave woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with the free woman’s son .”
Therefore , brothers and sisters , we are not children of the slave woman , but of the free woman .
It is for freedom that Christ has set us free . Stand firm , then , and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery .
Mark my words ! I , Paul , tell you that if you let yourselves be circumcised , Christ will be of no value to you at all .
Again I declare to every man who lets himself be circumcised that he is obligated to obey the whole law .
You who are trying to be justified by the law have been alienated from Christ ; you have fallen away from grace .
For through the Spirit we eagerly await by faith the righteousness for which we hope . 
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any value . The only thing that counts is faith expressing itself through love .
You were running a good race . Who cut in on you to keep you from obeying the truth ? 
That kind of persuasion does not come from the one who calls you . 
“A little yeast works through the whole batch of dough .” 
I am confident in the Lord that you will take no other view . The one who is throwing you into confusion , whoever that may be , will have to pay the penalty .
Brothers and sisters , if I am still preaching circumcision , why am I still being persecuted ? In that case the offense of the cross has been abolished . 
As for those agitators , I wish they would go the whole way and emasculate themselves !
You , my brothers and sisters , were called to be free . But do not use your freedom to indulge the flesh ; rather , serve one another humbly in love . 
For the entire law is fulfilled in keeping this one command : “Love your neighbor as yourself .”
If you bite and devour each other , watch out or you will be destroyed by each other .
So I say , walk by the Spirit , and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh . 
For the flesh desires what is contrary to the Spirit , and the Spirit what is contrary to the flesh . They are in conflict with each other , so that you are not to do whatever you want . 
But if you are led by the Spirit , you are not under the law .
The acts of the flesh are obvious : sexual immorality , impurity and debauchery ; 
idolatry and witchcraft ; hatred , discord , jealousy , fits of rage , selfish ambition , dissensions , factions 
and envy ; drunkenness , orgies , and the like . I warn you , as I did before , that those who live like this will not inherit the kingdom of God .
But the fruit of the Spirit is love , joy , peace , forbearance , kindness , goodness , faithfulness , 
gentleness and self-control . Against such things there is no law .
Those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires .
Since we live by the Spirit , let us keep in step with the Spirit .
Let us not become conceited , provoking and envying each other .
Brothers and sisters , if someone is caught in a sin , you who live by the Spirit should restore that person gently . But watch yourselves , or you also may be tempted . 
Carry each other’s burdens , and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ . 
If anyone thinks they are something when they are not , they deceive themselves .
Each one should test their own actions . Then they can take pride in themselves alone , without comparing themselves to someone else , 
for each one should carry their own load .
Nevertheless , the one who receives instruction in the word should share all good things with their instructor .
Do not be deceived : God cannot be mocked . A man reaps what he sows . 
Whoever sows to please their flesh , from the flesh will reap destruction ; whoever sows to please the Spirit , from the Spirit will reap eternal life .
Let us not become weary in doing good , for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up . 
Therefore , as we have opportunity , let us do good to all people , especially to those who belong to the family of believers .
See what large letters I use as I write to you with my own hand !
Those who want to impress people by means of the flesh are trying to compel you to be circumcised . The only reason they do this is to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Christ . 
Not even those who are circumcised keep the law , yet they want you to be circumcised that they may boast about your circumcision in the flesh . 
May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ , through which the world has been crucified to me , and I to the world . 
Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything ; what counts is the new creation . 
Peace and mercy to all who follow this rule—to the Israel of God .
From now on , let no one cause me trouble , for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit , brothers and sisters . Amen .
Ephesians
Paul , an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God , To God’s holy people in Ephesus , the faithful in Christ Jesus :
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ . 
For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight . In love 
he predestined us for adoption to sonship[c] through Jesus Christ , in accordance with his pleasure and will—
to the praise of his glorious grace , which he has freely given us in the One he loves .
In him we have redemption through his blood , the forgiveness of sins , in accordance with the riches of God’s grace 
that he lavished on us . With all wisdom and understanding , 
he made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure , which he purposed in Christ , 
to be put into effect when the times reach their fulfillment—to bring unity to all things in heaven and on earth under Christ .
In him we were also chosen , having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will , 
in order that we , who were the first to put our hope in Christ , might be for the praise of his glory .
And you also were included in Christ when you heard the message of truth , the gospel of your salvation . When you believed , you were marked in him with a seal , the promised Holy Spirit , 
who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God’s possession—to the praise of his glory .
For this reason , ever since I heard about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all God’s people , 
I have not stopped giving thanks for you , remembering you in my prayers . 
I keep asking that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ , the glorious Father , may give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation , so that you may know him better . 
I pray that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you , the riches of his glorious inheritance in his holy people , 
and his incomparably great power for us who believe . That power is the same as the mighty strength
he exerted when he raised Christ from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms , 
far above all rule and authority , power and dominion , and every name that is invoked , not only in the present age but also in the one to come . 
And God placed all things under his feet and appointed him to be head over everything for the church , 
which is his body , the fullness of him who fills everything in every way .
As for you , you were dead in your transgressions and sins , 
in which you used to live when you followed the ways of this world and of the ruler of the kingdom of the air , the spirit who is now at work in those who are disobedient . 
All of us also lived among them at one time , gratifying the cravings of our flesh and following its desires and thoughts . Like the rest , we were by nature deserving of wrath . 
But because of his great love for us , God , who is rich in mercy , 
made us alive with Christ even when we were dead in transgressions—it is by grace you have been saved . 
And God raised us up with Christ and seated us with him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus , 
in order that in the coming ages he might show the incomparable riches of his grace , expressed in his kindness to us in Christ Jesus . 
For it is by grace you have been saved , through faith—and this is not from yourselves , it is the gift of God— 
not by works , so that no one can boast . 
For we are God’s handwork , created in Christ Jesus to do good works , which God prepared in advance for us to do .
Therefore , remember that formerly you who are Gentiles by birth and called “uncircumcised” by those who call themselves “the circumcision” (which is done in the body by human hands)— 
remember that at that time you were separate from Christ , excluded from citizenship in Israel and foreigners to the covenants of the promise , without hope and without God in the world . 
But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ .
For he himself is our peace , who has made the two groups one and has destroyed the barrier , the dividing wall of hostility , 
by setting aside in his flesh the law with its commands and regulations . His purpose was to create in himself one new humanity out of the two , thus making peace , 
and in one body to reconcile both of them to God through the cross , by which he put to death their hostility .
He came and preached peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near .
For through him we both have access to the Father by one Spirit .
Consequently , you are no longer foreigners and strangers , but fellow citizens with God’s people and also members of his household , 
built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets , with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone . 
In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord . 
And in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his Spirit .
For this reason I , Paul , the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles—
Surely you have heard about the administration of God’s grace that was given to me for you , 
that is , the mystery made known to me by revelation , as I have already written briefly . 
In reading this , then , you will be able to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ , 
which was not made known to people in other generations as it has now been revealed by the Spirit to God’s holy apostles and prophets .
This mystery is that through the gospel the Gentiles are heirs together with Israel , members together of one body , and sharers together in the promise in Christ Jesus .
I became a servant of this gospel by the gift of God’s grace given me through the working of his power . 
Although I am less than the least of all the Lord’s people , this grace was given me : to preach to the Gentiles the boundless riches of Christ ,
and to make plain to everyone the administration of this mystery , which for ages past was kept hidden in God , who created all things . 
His intent was that now , through the church , the manifold wisdom of God should be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly realms , 
according to his eternal purpose that he accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord . 
In him and through faith in him we may approach God with freedom and confidence . 
I ask you , therefore , not to be discouraged because of my sufferings for you , which are your glory .
For this reason I kneel before the Father , 
from whom every family in heaven and on earth derives its name . 
I pray that out of his glorious riches he may strengthen you with power through his Spirit in your inner being ,
so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith . And I pray that you , being rooted and established in love , 
may have power , together with all the Lord’s holy people , to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ ,
and to know this love that surpasses knowledge—that you may be filled to the measure of all the fullness of God .
Now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine , according to his power that is at work within us ,
to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus throughout all generations , for ever and ever ! Amen .
As a prisoner for the Lord , then , I urge you to live a life worthy of the calling you have received . 
Be completely humble and gentle ; be patient , bearing with one another in love .
Make every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit through the bond of peace .
There is one body and one Spirit , just as you were called to one hope when you were called ; 
one Lord , one faith , one baptism ; 
one God and Father of all , who is over all and through all and in all .
But to each one of us grace has been given as Christ apportioned it .
This is why it says : “When he ascended on high , he took many captives and gave gifts to his people .”
(What does “he ascended” mean except that he also descended to the lower , earthly regions ?
He who descended is the very one who ascended higher than all the heavens , in order to fill the whole universe .) 
So Christ himself gave the apostles , the prophets , the evangelists , the pastors and teachers , 
to equip his people for works of service , so that the body of Christ may be built up 
until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God and become mature , attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ .
Then we will no longer be infants , tossed back and forth by the waves , and blown here and there by every wind of teaching and by the cunning and craftiness of people in their deceitful scheming . 
Instead , speaking the truth in love , we will grow to become in every respect the mature body of him who is the head , that is , Christ .
From him the whole body , joined and held together by every supporting ligament , grows and builds itself up in love , as each part does its work .
So I tell you this , and insist on it in the Lord , that you must no longer live as the Gentiles do , in the futility of their thinking . 
They are darkened in their understanding and separated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardening of their hearts . 
Having lost all sensitivity , they have given themselves over to sensuality so as to indulge in every kind of impurity , and they are full of greed .
That , however , is not the way of life you learned 
when you heard about Christ and were taught in him in accordance with the truth that is in Jesus .
You were taught , with regard to your former way of life , to put off your old self , which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires ;
to be made new in the attitude of your minds ;
and to put on the new self , created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness .
Therefore each of you must put off falsehood and speak truthfully to your neighbor , for we are all members of one body .
“In your anger do not sin” : Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry , 
and do not give the devil a foothold .
Anyone who has been stealing must steal no longer , but must work , doing something useful with their own hands , that they may have something to share with those in need .
Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths , but only what is helpful for building others up according to their needs , that it may benefit those who listen . 
And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God , with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption . 
Get rid of all bitterness , rage and anger , brawling and slander , along with every form of malice . 
Be kind and compassionate to one another , forgiving each other , just as in Christ God forgave you .
Follow God’s example , therefore , as dearly loved children
and walk in the way of love , just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God .
But among you there must not be even a hint of sexual immorality , or of any kind of impurity , or of greed , because these are improper for God’s holy people . 
Nor should there be obscenity , foolish talk or coarse joking , which are out of place , but rather thanksgiving . 
For of this you can be sure : No immoral , impure or greedy person—such a person is an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God .
Let no one deceive you with empty words , for because of such things God’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient .
Therefore do not be partners with them .
For you were once darkness , but now you are light in the Lord . Live as children of light 
(for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness , righteousness and truth) 
and find out what pleases the Lord . 
Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness , but rather expose them . 
It is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret . 
But everything exposed by the light becomes visible—and everything that is illuminated becomes a light .
This is why it is said : “Wake up , sleeper , rise from the dead , and Christ will shine on you .”
Be very careful , then , how you live—not as unwise but as wise , 
making the most of every opportunity , because the days are evil . 
Therefore do not be foolish , but understand what the Lord’s will is . 
Do not get drunk on wine , which leads to debauchery . Instead , be filled with the Spirit , 
speaking to one another with psalms , hymns , and songs from the Spirit . Sing and make music from your heart to the Lord , 
always giving thanks to God the Father for everything , in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ .
Wives , submit yourselves to your own husbands as you do to the Lord . 
For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church , his body , of which he is the Savior . 
Now as the church submits to Christ , so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything .
Husbands , love your wives , just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her 
to make her holy , cleansing her by the washing with water through the word , 
and to present her to himself as a radiant church , without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish , but holy and blameless . 
In this same way , husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies . He who loves his wife loves himself . 
After all , no one ever hated their own body , but they feed and care for their body , just as Christ does the church— 
for we are members of his body . 
“For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife , and the two will become one flesh .”
This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church . 
However , each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself , and the wife must respect her husband .
Children , obey your parents in the Lord , for this is right . 
“Honor your father and mother”—which is the first commandment with a promise—
“so that it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long life on the earth .”
Fathers , do not exasperate your children ; instead , bring them up in the training and instruction of the Lord .
Slaves , obey your earthly masters with respect and fear , and with sincerity of heart , just as you would obey Christ . 
Obey them not only to win their favor when their eye is on you , but as slaves of Christ , doing the will of God from your heart . 
Serve wholeheartedly , as if you were serving the Lord , not people ,
because you know that the Lord will reward each one for whatever good they do , whether they are slave or free .
And masters , treat your slaves in the same way . Do not threaten them , since you know that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven , and there is no favoritism with him .
Finally , be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power . 
Put on the full armor of God , so that you can take your stand against the devil’s schemes . 
For our struggle is not against flesh and blood , but against the rulers , against the authorities , against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms .
Therefore put on the full armor of God , so that when the day of evil comes , you may be able to stand your ground , and after you have done everything , to stand . 
Stand firm then , with the belt of truth buckled around your waist , with the breastplate of righteousness in place ,
and with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace . 
In addition to all this , take up the shield of faith , with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one .
Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit , which is the word of God .
And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests . With this in mind , be alert and always keep on praying for all the Lord’s people . 
Pray also for me , that whenever I speak , words may be given me so that I will fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel , 
for which I am an ambassador in chains . Pray that I may declare it fearlessly , as I should .
Tychicus , the dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord , will tell you everything , so that you also may know how I am and what I am doing . 
I am sending him to you for this very purpose , that you may know how we are , and that he may encourage you .
Peace to the brothers and sisters , and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
Grace to all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love .
Philippians 
Paul and Timothy , servants of Christ Jesus , To all God’s holy people in Christ Jesus at Philippi , together with the overseers and deacons :
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
I thank my God every time I remember you . 
In all my prayers for all of you , I always pray with joy 
because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now , 
being confident of this , that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus .
It is right for me to feel this way about all of you , since I have you in my heart and , whether I am in chains or defending and confirming the gospel , all of you share in God’s grace with me . 
God can testify how I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus .
And this is my prayer : that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight , 
so that you may be able to discern what is best and may be pure and blameless for the day of Christ , 
filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ—to the glory and praise of God .
Now I want you to know , brothers and sisters , that what has happened to me has actually served to advance the gospel . 
As a result , it has become clear throughout the whole palace guard and to everyone else that I am in chains for Christ . 
And because of my chains , most of the brothers and sisters have become confident in the Lord and dare all the more to proclaim the gospel without fear .
It is true that some preach Christ out of envy and rivalry , but others out of goodwill . 
The latter do so out of love , knowing that I am put here for the defense of the gospel . 
The former preach Christ out of selfish ambition , not sincerely , supposing that they can stir up trouble for me while I am in chains . 
But what does it matter ? The important thing is that in every way , whether from false motives or true , Christ is preached . And because of this I rejoice . Yes , and I will continue to rejoice , 
for I know that through your prayers and God’s provision of the Spirit of Jesus Christ what has happened to me will turn out for my deliverance .
I eagerly expect and hope that I will in no way be ashamed , but will have sufficient courage so that now as always Christ will be exalted in my body , whether by life or by death . 
For to me , to live is Christ and to die is gain . 
If I am to go on living in the body , this will mean fruitful labor for me . Yet what shall I choose ? I do not know ! 
I am torn between the two : I desire to depart and be with Christ , which is better by far ; 
but it is more necessary for you that I remain in the body . 
Convinced of this , I know that I will remain , and I will continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith , 
so that through my being with you again your boasting in Christ Jesus will abound on account of me .
Whatever happens , conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ . Then , whether I come and see you or only hear about you in my absence , I will know that you stand firm in the one Spirit , striving together as one for the faith of the gospel 
without being frightened in any way by those who oppose you . This is a sign to them that they will be destroyed , but that you will be saved—and that by God . 
For it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ not only to believe in him , but also to suffer for him ,
since you are going through the same struggle you saw I had , and now hear that I still have .
Therefore if you have any encouragement from being united with Christ , if any comfort from his love , if any common sharing in the Spirit , if any tenderness and compassion , 
then make my joy complete by being like-minded , having the same love , being one in spirit and of one mind .
Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit . Rather , in humility value others above yourselves , 
not looking to your own interests but each of you to the interests of the others .
In your relationships with one another , have the same mindset as Christ Jesus :
Who , being in very nature God , did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage ;
rather , he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant , being made in human likeness .
And being found in appearance as a man , he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death— even death on a cross !
Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name ,
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow , in heaven and on earth and under the earth ,
and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord , to the glory of God the Father .
Therefore , my dear friends , as you have always obeyed—not only in my presence , but now much more in my absence—continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling , 
for it is God who works in you to will and to act in order to fulfill his good purpose .
Do everything without grumbling or arguing , 
so that you may become blameless and pure , “children of God without fault in a warped and crooked generation .” Then you will shine among them like stars in the sky 
as you hold firmly to the word of life . And then I will be able to boast on the day of Christ that I did not run or labor in vain . 
But even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service coming from your faith , I am glad and rejoice with all of you . 
So you too should be glad and rejoice with me .
I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon , that I also may be cheered when I receive news about you .
I have no one else like him , who will show genuine concern for your welfare . 
For everyone looks out for their own interests , not those of Jesus Christ . 
But you know that Timothy has proved himself , because as a son with his father he has served with me in the work of the gospel . 
I hope , therefore , to send him as soon as I see how things go with me . 
And I am confident in the Lord that I myself will come soon .
But I think it is necessary to send back to you Epaphroditus , my brother , co-worker and fellow soldier , who is also your messenger , whom you sent to take care of my needs . 
For he longs for all of you and is distressed because you heard he was ill . 
Indeed he was ill , and almost died . But God had mercy on him , and not on him only but also on me , to spare me sorrow upon sorrow . 
Therefore I am all the more eager to send him , so that when you see him again you may be glad and I may have less anxiety .
So then , welcome him in the Lord with great joy , and honor people like him , 
because he almost died for the work of Christ . He risked his life to make up for the help you yourselves could not give me .
Further , my brothers and sisters , rejoice in the Lord ! It is no trouble for me to write the same things to you again , and it is a safeguard for you . 
Watch out for those dogs , those evildoers , those mutilators of the flesh . 
For it is we who are the circumcision , we who serve God by his Spirit , who boast in Christ Jesus , and who put no confidence in the flesh— 
though I myself have reasons for such confidence . If someone else thinks they have reasons to put confidence in the flesh , I have more :
circumcised on the eighth day , of the people of Israel , of the tribe of Benjamin , a Hebrew of Hebrews ; in regard to the law , a Pharisee ; 
as for zeal , persecuting the church ; as for righteousness based on the law , faultless .
But whatever were gains to me I now consider loss for the sake of Christ . 
What is more , I consider everything a loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord , for whose sake I have lost all things . I consider them garbage , that I may gain Christ 
and be found in him , not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law , but that which is through faith in Christ—the righteousness that comes from God on the basis of faith . 
I want to know Christ—yes , to know the power of his resurrection and participation in his sufferings , becoming like him in his death ,
and so , somehow , attaining to the resurrection from the dead .
Not that I have already obtained all this , or have already arrived at my goal , but I press on to take hold of that for which Christ Jesus took hold of me . 
Brothers and sisters , I do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it . But one thing I do : Forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead , 
I press on toward the goal to win the prize for which God has called me heavenward in Christ Jesus .
All of us , then , who are mature should take such a view of things . And if on some point you think differently , that too God will make clear to you . 
Only let us live up to what we have already attained .
Join together in following my example , brothers and sisters , and just as you have us as a model , keep your eyes on those who live as we do .
For , as I have often told you before and now tell you again even with tears , many live as enemies of the cross of Christ . 
Their destiny is destruction , their god is their stomach , and their glory is in their shame . Their mind is set on earthly things . 
But our citizenship is in heaven . And we eagerly await a Savior from there , the Lord Jesus Christ , 
who , by the power that enables him to bring everything under his control , will transform our lowly bodies so that they will be like his glorious body .
Therefore , my brothers and sisters , you whom I love and long for , my joy and crown , stand firm in the Lord in this way , dear friends !
I plead with Euodia and I plead with Syntyche to be of the same mind in the Lord .
Yes , and I ask you , my true companion , help these women since they have contended at my side in the cause of the gospel , along with Clement and the rest of my co-workers , whose names are in the book of life .
Rejoice in the Lord always . I will say it again : Rejoice !
Let your gentleness be evident to all . The Lord is near . 
Do not be anxious about anything , but in every situation , by prayer and petition , with thanksgiving , present your requests to God . 
And the peace of God , which transcends all understanding , will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus .
Finally , brothers and sisters , whatever is true , whatever is noble , whatever is right , whatever is pure , whatever is lovely , whatever is admirable—if anything is excellent or praiseworthy—think about such things . 
Whatever you have learned or received or heard from me , or seen in me—put it into practice . And the God of peace will be with you .
I rejoiced greatly in the Lord that at last you renewed your concern for me . Indeed , you were concerned , but you had no opportunity to show it . 
I am not saying this because I am in need , for I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances . 
I know what it is to be in need , and I know what it is to have plenty . I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation , whether well fed or hungry , whether living in plenty or in want . 
I can do all this through him who gives me strength .
Yet it was good of you to share in my troubles . 
Moreover , as you Philippians know , in the early days of your acquaintance with the gospel , when I set out from Macedonia , not one church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving , except you only ; 
for even when I was in Thessalonica , you sent me aid more than once when I was in need . 
Not that I desire your gifts ; what I desire is that more be credited to your account .
I have received full payment and have more than enough . I am amply supplied , now that I have received from Epaphroditus the gifts you sent . They are a fragrant offering , an acceptable sacrifice , pleasing to God . 
And my God will meet all your needs according to the riches of his glory in Christ Jesus .
To our God and Father be glory for ever and ever . Amen .
Greet all God’s people in Christ Jesus . The brothers and sisters who are with me send greetings .
All God’s people here send you greetings , especially those who belong to Caesar’s household .
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit . Amen .
Colossians
Paul , an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God , and Timothy our brother ,
To God’s holy people in Colossae , the faithful brothers and sisters in Christ : Grace and peace to you from God our Father .
We always thank God , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , when we pray for you ,
because we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love you have for all God’s people— 
the faith and love that spring from the hope stored up for you in heaven and about which you have already heard in the true message of the gospel
that has come to you . In the same way , the gospel is bearing fruit and growing throughout the whole world—just as it has been doing among you since the day you heard it and truly understood God’s grace . 
You learned it from Epaphras , our dear fellow servant , who is a faithful minister of Christ on our behalf , 
and who also told us of your love in the Spirit .
For this reason , since the day we heard about you , we have not stopped praying for you . We continually ask God to fill you with the knowledge of his will through all the wisdom and understanding that the Spirit gives ,
so that you may live a life worthy of the Lord and please him in every way : bearing fruit in every good work , growing in the knowledge of God , 
being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may have great endurance and patience , 
and giving joyful thanks to the Father , who has qualified you[f] to share in the inheritance of his holy people in the kingdom of light . 
For he has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of the Son he loves , 
in whom we have redemption , the forgiveness of sins .
The Son is the image of the invisible God , the firstborn over all creation . 
For in him all things were created : things in heaven and on earth , visible and invisible , whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities ; all things have been created through him and for him . 
He is before all things , and in him all things hold together . 
And he is the head of the body , the church ; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead , so that in everything he might have the supremacy . 
For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him , 
and through him to reconcile to himself all things , whether things on earth or things in heaven , by making peace through his blood , shed on the cross .
Once you were alienated from God and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior . 
But now he has reconciled you by Christ’s physical body through death to present you holy in his sight , without blemish and free from accusation— 
if you continue in your faith , established and firm , and do not move from the hope held out in the gospel . This is the gospel that you heard and that has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven , and of which I , Paul , have become a servant .
Now I rejoice in what I am suffering for you , and I fill up in my flesh what is still lacking in regard to Christ’s afflictions , for the sake of his body , which is the church .
I have become its servant by the commission God gave me to present to you the word of God in its fullness— 
the mystery that has been kept hidden for ages and generations , but is now disclosed to the Lord’s people . 
To them God has chosen to make known among the Gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery , which is Christ in you , the hope of glory .
He is the one we proclaim , admonishing and teaching everyone with all wisdom , so that we may present everyone fully mature in Christ . 
To this end I strenuously contend with all the energy Christ so powerfully works in me .
I want you to know how hard I am contending for you and for those at Laodicea , and for all who have not met me personally . 
My goal is that they may be encouraged in heart and united in love , so that they may have the full riches of complete understanding , in order that they may know the mystery of God , namely , Christ ,
in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge . 
I tell you this so that no one may deceive you by fine-sounding arguments . 
For though I am absent from you in body , I am present with you in spirit and delight to see how disciplined you are and how firm your faith in Christ is .
So then , just as you received Christ Jesus as Lord , continue to live your lives in him , 
rooted and built up in him , strengthened in the faith as you were taught , and overflowing with thankfulness .
See to it that no one takes you captive through hollow and deceptive philosophy , which depends on human tradition and the elemental spiritual forces of this world rather than on Christ .
For in Christ all the fullness of the Deity lives in bodily form , 
and in Christ you have been brought to fullness . He is the head over every power and authority . 
In him you were also circumcised with a circumcision not performed by human hands . Your whole self ruled by the flesh was put off when you were circumcised by Christ , 
having been buried with him in baptism , in which you were also raised with him through your faith in the working of God , who raised him from the dead .
When you were dead in your sins and in the uncircumcision of your flesh , God made you alive with Christ . He forgave us all our sins , 
having canceled the charge of our legal indebtedness , which stood against us and condemned us ; he has taken it away , nailing it to the cross .
And having disarmed the powers and authorities , he made a public spectacle of them , triumphing over them by the cross .
Therefore do not let anyone judge you by what you eat or drink , or with regard to a religious festival , a New Moon celebration or a Sabbath day .
These are a shadow of the things that were to come ; the reality , however , is found in Christ .
Do not let anyone who delights in false humility and the worship of angels disqualify you . Such a person also goes into great detail about what they have seen ; they are puffed up with idle notions by their unspiritual mind . 
They have lost connection with the head , from whom the whole body , supported and held together by its ligaments and sinews , grows as God causes it to grow .
Since you died with Christ to the elemental spiritual forces of this world , why , as though you still belonged to the world , do you submit to its rules : 
“Do not handle ! Do not taste ! Do not touch !” ? 
These rules , which have to do with things that are all destined to perish with use , are based on merely human commands and teachings .
Such regulations indeed have an appearance of wisdom , with their self-imposed worship , their false humility and their harsh treatment of the body , but they lack any value in restraining sensual indulgence .
Since , then , you have been raised with Christ , set your hearts on things above , where Christ is , seated at the right hand of God .
Set your minds on things above , not on earthly things .
For you died , and your life is now hidden with Christ in God .
When Christ , who is your life , appears , then you also will appear with him in glory .
Put to death , therefore , whatever belongs to your earthly nature : sexual immorality , impurity , lust , evil desires and greed , which is idolatry . 
Because of these , the wrath of God is coming .
You used to walk in these ways , in the life you once lived . 
But now you must also rid yourselves of all such things as these : anger , rage , malice , slander , and filthy language from your lips . 
Do not lie to each other , since you have taken off your old self with its practices 
and have put on the new self , which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its Creator . 
Here there is no Gentile or Jew , circumcised or uncircumcised , barbarian , Scythian , slave or free , but Christ is all , and is in all .
Therefore , as God’s chosen people , holy and dearly loved , clothe yourselves with compassion , kindness , humility , gentleness and patience . 
Bear with each other and forgive one another if any of you has a grievance against someone . Forgive as the Lord forgave you . 
And over all these virtues put on love , which binds them all together in perfect unity .
Let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts , since as members of one body you were called to peace . And be thankful . 
Let the message of Christ dwell among you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom through psalms , hymns , and songs from the Spirit , singing to God with gratitude in your hearts .
And whatever you do , whether in word or deed , do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus , giving thanks to God the Father through him .
Wives , submit yourselves to your husbands , as is fitting in the Lord .
Husbands , love your wives and do not be harsh with them .
Children , obey your parents in everything , for this pleases the Lord .
Fathers , do not embitter your children , or they will become discouraged .
Slaves , obey your earthly masters in everything ; and do it , not only when their eye is on you and to curry their favor , but with sincerity of heart and reverence for the Lord . 
Whatever you do , work at it with all your heart , as working for the Lord , not for human masters , 
since you know that you will receive an inheritance from the Lord as a reward . It is the Lord Christ you are serving .
Anyone who does wrong will be repaid for their wrongs , and there is no favoritism .
Masters , provide your slaves with what is right and fair , because you know that you also have a Master in heaven .
Devote yourselves to prayer , being watchful and thankful . 
And pray for us , too , that God may open a door for our message , so that we may proclaim the mystery of Christ , for which I am in chains .
Pray that I may proclaim it clearly , as I should . 
Be wise in the way you act toward outsiders ; make the most of every opportunity . 
Let your conversation be always full of grace , seasoned with salt , so that you may know how to answer everyone .
Tychicus will tell you all the news about me . He is a dear brother , a faithful minister and fellow servant in the Lord .
I am sending him to you for the express purpose that you may know about our circumstances and that he may encourage your hearts . 
He is coming with Onesimus , our faithful and dear brother , who is one of you . They will tell you everything that is happening here .
My fellow prisoner Aristarchus sends you his greetings , as does Mark , the cousin of Barnabas . (You have received instructions about him ; if he comes to you , welcome him .) 
Jesus , who is called Justus , also sends greetings . These are the only Jews among my co-workers for the kingdom of God , and they have proved a comfort to me . 
Epaphras , who is one of you and a servant of Christ Jesus , sends greetings . He is always wrestling in prayer for you , that you may stand firm in all the will of God , mature and fully assured . 
I vouch for him that he is working hard for you and for those at Laodicea and Hierapolis . 
Our dear friend Luke , the doctor , and Demas send greetings . 
Give my greetings to the brothers and sisters at Laodicea , and to Nympha and the church in her house .
After this letter has been read to you , see that it is also read in the church of the Laodiceans and that you in turn read the letter from Laodicea .
Tell Archippus : “See to it that you complete the ministry you have received in the Lord .”
I , Paul , write this greeting in my own hand . Remember my chains . Grace be with you .
1 Thessalonians
Paul , Silas and Timothy ,To the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ :Grace and peace to you .
We always thank God for all of you and continually mention you in our prayers .
We remember before our God and Father your work produced by faith , your labor prompted by love , and your endurance inspired by hope in our Lord Jesus Christ .
For we know , brothers and sisters loved by God , that he has chosen you , 
because our gospel came to you not simply with words but also with power , with the Holy Spirit and deep conviction . You know how we lived among you for your sake . 
You became imitators of us and of the Lord , for you welcomed the message in the midst of severe suffering with the joy given by the Holy Spirit .
And so you became a model to all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia .
The Lord’s message rang out from you not only in Macedonia and Achaia—your faith in God has become known everywhere . Therefore we do not need to say anything about it ,
for they themselves report what kind of reception you gave us . They tell how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God , 
and to wait for his Son from heaven , whom he raised from the dead—Jesus , who rescues us from the coming wrath .
You know , brothers and sisters , that our visit to you was not without results . 
We had previously suffered and been treated outrageously in Philippi , as you know , but with the help of our God we dared to tell you his gospel in the face of strong opposition .
For the appeal we make does not spring from error or impure motives , nor are we trying to trick you . 
On the contrary , we speak as those approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel . We are not trying to please people but God , who tests our hearts . 
You know we never used flattery , nor did we put on a mask to cover up greed—God is our witness . 
We were not looking for praise from people , not from you or anyone else , even though as apostles of Christ we could have asserted our authority . 
Instead , we were like young children among you . Just as a nursing mother cares for her children , 
so we cared for you . Because we loved you so much , we were delighted to share with you not only the gospel of God but our lives as well .
Surely you remember , brothers and sisters , our toil and hardship ; we worked night and day in order not to be a burden to anyone while we preached the gospel of God to you . 
You are witnesses , and so is God , of how holy , righteous and blameless we were among you who believed .
For you know that we dealt with each of you as a father deals with his own children , 
encouraging , comforting and urging you to live lives worthy of God , who calls you into his kingdom and glory .
And we also thank God continually because , when you received the word of God , which you heard from us , you accepted it not as a human word , but as it actually is , the word of God , which is indeed at work in you who believe .
For you , brothers and sisters , became imitators of God’s churches in Judea , which are in Christ Jesus : You suffered from your own people the same things those churches suffered from the Jews 
who killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets and also drove us out . They displease God and are hostile to everyone 
in their effort to keep us from speaking to the Gentiles so that they may be saved . In this way they always heap up their sins to the limit . The wrath of God has come upon them at last .
But , brothers and sisters , when we were orphaned by being separated from you for a short time (in person , not in thought) , out of our intense longing we made every effort to see you .
For we wanted to come to you—certainly I , Paul , did , again and again—but Satan blocked our way . 
For what is our hope , our joy , or the crown in which we will glory in the presence of our Lord Jesus when he comes ? Is it not you ? 
Indeed , you are our glory and joy .
So when we could stand it no longer , we thought it best to be left by ourselves in Athens . 
We sent Timothy , who is our brother and co-worker in God’s service in spreading the gospel of Christ , to strengthen and encourage you in your faith , 
so that no one would be unsettled by these trials . For you know quite well that we are destined for them .
In fact , when we were with you , we kept telling you that we would be persecuted . And it turned out that way , as you well know .
For this reason , when I could stand it no longer , I sent to find out about your faith . I was afraid that in some way the tempter had tempted you and that our labors might have been in vain .
But Timothy has just now come to us from you and has brought good news about your faith and love . He has told us that you always have pleasant memories of us and that you long to see us , just as we also long to see you .
Therefore , brothers and sisters , in all our distress and persecution we were encouraged about you because of your faith . 
For now we really live , since you are standing firm in the Lord . 
How can we thank God enough for you in return for all the joy we have in the presence of our God because of you ? 
Night and day we pray most earnestly that we may see you again and supply what is lacking in your faith .
Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus clear the way for us to come to you . 
May the Lord make your love increase and overflow for each other and for everyone else , just as ours does for you . 
May he strengthen your hearts so that you will be blameless and holy in the presence of our God and Father when our Lord Jesus comes with all his holy ones .
As for other matters , brothers and sisters , we instructed you how to live in order to please God , as in fact you are living . Now we ask you and urge you in the Lord Jesus to do this more and more . 
For you know what instructions we gave you by the authority of the Lord Jesus .
It is God’s will that you should be sanctified : that you should avoid sexual immorality ;
that each of you should learn to control your own body in a way that is holy and honorable , 
not in passionate lust like the pagans , who do not know God ; 
and that in this matter no one should wrong or take advantage of a brother or sister .The Lord will punish all those who commit such sins , as we told you and warned you before .
For God did not call us to be impure , but to live a holy life . 
Therefore , anyone who rejects this instruction does not reject a human being but God , the very God who gives you his Holy Spirit .
Now about your love for one another we do not need to write to you , for you yourselves have been taught by God to love each other . 
And in fact , you do love all of God’s family throughout Macedonia . Yet we urge you , brothers and sisters , to do so more and more , 
and to make it your ambition to lead a quiet life : You should mind your own business and work with your hands , just as we told you , 
so that your daily life may win the respect of outsiders and so that you will not be dependent on anybody .
Brothers and sisters , we do not want you to be uninformed about those who sleep in death , so that you do not grieve like the rest of mankind , who have no hope . 
For we believe that Jesus died and rose again , and so we believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in him . 
According to the Lord’s word , we tell you that we who are still alive , who are left until the coming of the Lord , will certainly not precede those who have fallen asleep .
For the Lord himself will come down from heaven , with a loud command , with the voice of the archangel and with the trumpet call of God , and the dead in Christ will rise first . 
After that , we who are still alive and are left will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air . And so we will be with the Lord forever . 
Therefore encourage one another with these words .
Now , brothers and sisters , about times and dates we do not need to write to you , 
for you know very well that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night . 
While people are saying , “Peace and safety ,” destruction will come on them suddenly , as labor pains on a pregnant woman , and they will not escape .
But you , brothers and sisters , are not in darkness so that this day should surprise you like a thief .
You are all children of the light and children of the day . We do not belong to the night or to the darkness .
So then , let us not be like others , who are asleep , but let us be awake and sober . 
For those who sleep , sleep at night , and those who get drunk , get drunk at night . 
But since we belong to the day , let us be sober , putting on faith and love as a breastplate , and the hope of salvation as a helmet . 
For God did not appoint us to suffer wrath but to receive salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ . 
He died for us so that , whether we are awake or asleep , we may live together with him . 
Therefore encourage one another and build each other up , just as in fact you are doing .
Now we ask you , brothers and sisters , to acknowledge those who work hard among you , who care for you in the Lord and who admonish you . 
Hold them in the highest regard in love because of their work . Live in peace with each other .
And we urge you , brothers and sisters , warn those who are idle and disruptive , encourage the disheartened , help the weak , be patient with everyone . 
Make sure that nobody pays back wrong for wrong , but always strive to do what is good for each other and for everyone else .
Rejoice always , 
pray continually , 
give thanks in all circumstances ; for this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus .
Do not quench the Spirit . 
Do not treat prophecies with contempt 
but test them all ; hold on to what is good , 
reject every kind of evil .
May God himself , the God of peace , sanctify you through and through . May your whole spirit , soul and body be kept blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ . 
The one who calls you is faithful , and he will do it .
Brothers and sisters , pray for us . 
Greet all God’s people with a holy kiss .
I charge you before the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers and sisters .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you .
2 Thessalonians
Paul , Silas and Timothy , To the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ :
Grace and peace to you from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
We ought always to thank God for you , brothers and sisters , and rightly so , because your faith is growing more and more , and the love all of you have for one another is increasing . 
Therefore , among God’s churches we boast about your perseverance and faith in all the persecutions and trials you are enduring .
All this is evidence that God’s judgment is right , and as a result you will be counted worthy of the kingdom of God , for which you are suffering . 
God is just : He will pay back trouble to those who trouble you
and give relief to you who are troubled , and to us as well . This will happen when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven in blazing fire with his powerful angels . 
He will punish those who do not know God and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus .
They will be punished with everlasting destruction and shut out from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might
on the day he comes to be glorified in his holy people and to be marveled at among all those who have believed . This includes you , because you believed our testimony to you .
With this in mind , we constantly pray for you , that our God may make you worthy of his calling , and that by his power he may bring to fruition your every desire for goodness and your every deed prompted by faith .
We pray this so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you , and you in him , according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ .
Concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to him , we ask you , brothers and sisters , 
not to become easily unsettled or alarmed by the teaching allegedly from us—whether by a prophecy or by word of mouth or by letter—asserting that the day of the Lord has already come . 
Don’t let anyone deceive you in any way , for that day will not come until the rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness is revealed , the man doomed to destruction . 
He will oppose and will exalt himself over everything that is called God or is worshiped , so that he sets himself up in God’s temple , proclaiming himself to be God .
Don’t you remember that when I was with you I used to tell you these things ? 
And now you know what is holding him back , so that he may be revealed at the proper time . 
For the secret power of lawlessness is already at work ; but the one who now holds it back will continue to do so till he is taken out of the way . 
And then the lawless one will be revealed , whom the Lord Jesus will overthrow with the breath of his mouth and destroy by the splendor of his coming . 
The coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with how Satan works . He will use all sorts of displays of power through signs and wonders that serve the lie , 
and all the ways that wickedness deceives those who are perishing . They perish because they refused to love the truth and so be saved .
For this reason God sends them a powerful delusion so that they will believe the lie 
and so that all will be condemned who have not believed the truth but have delighted in wickedness .
But we ought always to thank God for you , brothers and sisters loved by the Lord , because God chose you as firstfruits to be saved through the sanctifying work of the Spirit and through belief in the truth . 
He called you to this through our gospel , that you might share in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ .
So then , brothers and sisters , stand firm and hold fast to the teachings we passed on to you , whether by word of mouth or by letter .
May our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father , who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal encouragement and good hope ,
encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good deed and word .
As for other matters , brothers and sisters , pray for us that the message of the Lord may spread rapidly and be honored , just as it was with you . 
And pray that we may be delivered from wicked and evil people , for not everyone has faith .
But the Lord is faithful , and he will strengthen you and protect you from the evil one . 
We have confidence in the Lord that you are doing and will continue to do the things we command .
May the Lord direct your hearts into God’s love and Christ’s perseverance .
In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ , we command you , brothers and sisters , to keep away from every believer who is idle and disruptive and does not live according to the teaching you received from us .
For you yourselves know how you ought to follow our example . We were not idle when we were with you , 
nor did we eat anyone’s food without paying for it . On the contrary , we worked night and day , laboring and toiling so that we would not be a burden to any of you . 
We did this , not because we do not have the right to such help , but in order to offer ourselves as a model for you to imitate . 
For even when we were with you , we gave you this rule : “The one who is unwilling to work shall not eat .”
We hear that some among you are idle and disruptive . They are not busy ; they are busybodies . 
Such people we command and urge in the Lord Jesus Christ to settle down and earn the food they eat . 
And as for you , brothers and sisters , never tire of doing what is good .
Take special note of anyone who does not obey our instruction in this letter . Do not associate with them , in order that they may feel ashamed . 
Yet do not regard them as an enemy , but warn them as you would a fellow believer .
Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way . The Lord be with all of you .
I , Paul , write this greeting in my own hand , which is the distinguishing mark in all my letters . This is how I write .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all .
1 Timothy
Paul , an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope ,
To Timothy my true son in the faith : Grace , mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord .
As I urged you when I went into Macedonia , stay there in Ephesus so that you may command certain people not to teach false doctrines any longer 
or to devote themselves to myths and endless genealogies . Such things promote controversial speculations rather than advancing God’s work—which is by faith . 
The goal of this command is love , which comes from a pure heart and a good conscience and a sincere faith .
Some have departed from these and have turned to meaningless talk . 
They want to be teachers of the law , but they do not know what they are talking about or what they so confidently affirm .
We know that the law is good if one uses it properly . 
We also know that the law is made not for the righteous but for lawbreakers and rebels , the ungodly and sinful , the unholy and irreligious , for those who kill their fathers or mothers , for murderers ,
for the sexually immoral , for those practicing homosexuality , for slave traders and liars and perjurers—and for whatever else is contrary to the sound doctrine
that conforms to the gospel concerning the glory of the blessed God , which he entrusted to me .
I thank Christ Jesus our Lord , who has given me strength , that he considered me trustworthy , appointing me to his service . 
Even though I was once a blasphemer and a persecutor and a violent man , I was shown mercy because I acted in ignorance and unbelief . 
The grace of our Lord was poured out on me abundantly , along with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus .
Here is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance : Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners—of whom I am the worst . 
But for that very reason I was shown mercy so that in me , the worst of sinners , Christ Jesus might display his immense patience as an example for those who would believe in him and receive eternal life . 
Now to the King eternal , immortal , invisible , the only God , be honor and glory for ever and ever . Amen .
Timothy , my son , I am giving you this command in keeping with the prophecies once made about you , so that by recalling them you may fight the battle well , 
holding on to faith and a good conscience , which some have rejected and so have suffered shipwreck with regard to the faith .
Among them are Hymenaeus and Alexander , whom I have handed over to Satan to be taught not to blaspheme .
I urge , then , first of all , that petitions , prayers , intercession and thanksgiving be made for all people— 
for kings and all those in authority , that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness .
This is good , and pleases God our Savior , 
who wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth . 
For there is one God and one mediator between God and mankind , the man Christ Jesus , 
who gave himself as a ransom for all people . This has now been witnessed to at the proper time . 
And for this purpose I was appointed a herald and an apostle—I am telling the truth , I am not lying—and a true and faithful teacher of the Gentiles .
Therefore I want the men everywhere to pray , lifting up holy hands without anger or disputing . 
I also want the women to dress modestly , with decency and propriety , adorning themselves , not with elaborate hairstyles or gold or pearls or expensive clothes ,
but with good deeds , appropriate for women who profess to worship God .
A woman should learn in quietness and full submission . 
I do not permit a woman to teach or to assume authority over a man ; she must be quiet . 
For Adam was formed first , then Eve . 
And Adam was not the one deceived ; it was the woman who was deceived and became a sinner . 
But women will be saved through childbearing—if they continue in faith , love and holiness with propriety .
Here is a trustworthy saying : Whoever aspires to be an overseer desires a noble task . 
Now the overseer is to be above reproach , faithful to his wife , temperate , self-controlled , respectable , hospitable , able to teach ,
not given to drunkenness , not violent but gentle , not quarrelsome , not a lover of money . 
He must manage his own family well and see that his children obey him , and he must do so in a manner worthy of full respect . 
(If anyone does not know how to manage his own family , how can he take care of God’s church ?) 
He must not be a recent convert , or he may become conceited and fall under the same judgment as the devil .
He must also have a good reputation with outsiders , so that he will not fall into disgrace and into the devil’s trap .
In the same way , deacons are to be worthy of respect , sincere , not indulging in much wine , and not pursuing dishonest gain .
They must keep hold of the deep truths of the faith with a clear conscience . 
They must first be tested ; and then if there is nothing against them , let them serve as deacons .
In the same way , the women[c] are to be worthy of respect , not malicious talkers but temperate and trustworthy in everything .
A deacon must be faithful to his wife and must manage his children and his household well . 
Those who have served well gain an excellent standing and great assurance in their faith in Christ Jesus .
Although I hope to come to you soon , I am writing you these instructions so that , 
if I am delayed , you will know how people ought to conduct themselves in God’s household , which is the church of the living God , the pillar and foundation of the truth . 
Beyond all question , the mystery from which true godliness springs is great : He appeared in the flesh , was vindicated by the Spirit , was seen by angels , was preached among the nations , was believed on in the world , was taken up in glory .
The Spirit clearly says that in later times some will abandon the faith and follow deceiving spirits and things taught by demons . 
Such teachings come through hypocritical liars , whose consciences have been seared as with a hot iron . 
They forbid people to marry and order them to abstain from certain foods , which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and who know the truth . 
For everything God created is good , and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving , 
because it is consecrated by the word of God and prayer .
If you point these things out to the brothers and sisters , you will be a good minister of Christ Jesus , nourished on the truths of the faith and of the good teaching that you have followed .
Have nothing to do with godless myths and old wives’ tales ; rather , train yourself to be godly . 
For physical training is of some value , but godliness has value for all things , holding promise for both the present life and the life to come . 
This is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance . 
That is why we labor and strive , because we have put our hope in the living God , who is the Savior of all people , and especially of those who believe .
Command and teach these things . 
Don’t let anyone look down on you because you are young , but set an example for the believers in speech , in conduct , in love , in faith and in purity . 
Until I come , devote yourself to the public reading of Scripture , to preaching and to teaching . 
Do not neglect your gift , which was given you through prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you .
Be diligent in these matters ; give yourself wholly to them , so that everyone may see your progress . 
Watch your life and doctrine closely . Persevere in them , because if you do , you will save both yourself and your hearers .
Do not rebuke an older man harshly , but exhort him as if he were your father . Treat younger men as brothers , 
older women as mothers , and younger women as sisters , with absolute purity .
Give proper recognition to those widows who are really in need . 
But if a widow has children or grandchildren , these should learn first of all to put their religion into practice by caring for their own family and so repaying their parents and grandparents , for this is pleasing to God .
The widow who is really in need and left all alone puts her hope in God and continues night and day to pray and to ask God for help .
But the widow who lives for pleasure is dead even while she lives .
Give the people these instructions , so that no one may be open to blame .
Anyone who does not provide for their relatives , and especially for their own household , has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever .
No widow may be put on the list of widows unless she is over sixty , has been faithful to her husband , 
and is well known for her good deeds , such as bringing up children , showing hospitality , washing the feet of the Lord’s people , helping those in trouble and devoting herself to all kinds of good deeds .
As for younger widows , do not put them on such a list . For when their sensual desires overcome their dedication to Christ , they want to marry . 
Thus they bring judgment on themselves , because they have broken their first pledge . 
Besides , they get into the habit of being idle and going about from house to house . And not only do they become idlers , but also busybodies who talk nonsense , saying things they ought not to . 
So I counsel younger widows to marry , to have children , to manage their homes and to give the enemy no opportunity for slander .
Some have in fact already turned away to follow Satan .
If any woman who is a believer has widows in her care , she should continue to help them and not let the church be burdened with them , so that the church can help those widows who are really in need .
The elders who direct the affairs of the church well are worthy of double honor , especially those whose work is preaching and teaching .
For Scripture says , “Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain ,” and “The worker deserves his wages .”
Do not entertain an accusation against an elder unless it is brought by two or three witnesses . 
But those elders who are sinning you are to reprove before everyone , so that the others may take warning .
I charge you , in the sight of God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels , to keep these instructions without partiality , and to do nothing out of favoritism .
Do not be hasty in the laying on of hands , and do not share in the sins of others . Keep yourself pure .
Stop drinking only water , and use a little wine because of your stomach and your frequent illnesses .
The sins of some are obvious , reaching the place of judgment ahead of them ; the sins of others trail behind them . 
In the same way , good deeds are obvious , and even those that are not obvious cannot remain hidden forever .
All who are under the yoke of slavery should consider their masters worthy of full respect , so that God’s name and our teaching may not be slandered . 
Those who have believing masters should not show them disrespect just because they are fellow believers . Instead , they should serve them even better because their masters are dear to them as fellow believers and are devoted to the welfare of their slaves . These are the things you are to teach and insist on .
If anyone teaches otherwise and does not agree to the sound instruction of our Lord Jesus Christ and to godly teaching , 
they are conceited and understand nothing . They have an unhealthy interest in controversies and quarrels about words that result in envy , strife , malicious talk , evil suspicions 
and constant friction between people of corrupt mind , who have been robbed of the truth and who think that godliness is a means to financial gain .
But godliness with contentment is great gain . 
For we brought nothing into the world , and we can take nothing out of it . 
But if we have food and clothing , we will be content with that . 
Those who want to get rich fall into temptation and a trap and into many foolish and harmful desires that plunge people into ruin and destruction .
For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil . Some people , eager for money , have wandered from the faith and pierced themselves with many griefs .
But you , man of God , flee from all this , and pursue righteousness , godliness , faith , love , endurance and gentleness . 
Fight the good fight of the faith . Take hold of the eternal life to which you were called when you made your good confession in the presence of many witnesses . 
In the sight of God , who gives life to everything , and of Christ Jesus , who while testifying before Pontius Pilate made the good confession , I charge you
to keep this command without spot or blame until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ , 
which God will bring about in his own time—God , the blessed and only Ruler , the King of kings and Lord of lords ,
who alone is immortal and who lives in unapproachable light , whom no one has seen or can see . To him be honor and might forever . Amen .
Command those who are rich in this present world not to be arrogant nor to put their hope in wealth , which is so uncertain , but to put their hope in God , who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment . 
Command them to do good , to be rich in good deeds , and to be generous and willing to share . 
In this way they will lay up treasure for themselves as a firm foundation for the coming age , so that they may take hold of the life that is truly life .
Timothy , guard what has been entrusted to your care . Turn away from godless chatter and the opposing ideas of what is falsely called knowledge , 
which some have professed and in so doing have departed from the faith . Grace be with you all .
2 Timotheo
Paul , an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God , in keeping with the promise of life that is in Christ Jesus ,
To Timothy , my dear son : Grace , mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord .
I thank God , whom I serve , as my ancestors did , with a clear conscience , as night and day I constantly remember you in my prayers . 
Recalling your tears , I long to see you , so that I may be filled with joy . 
I am reminded of your sincere faith , which first lived in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice and , I am persuaded , now lives in you also .
For this reason I remind you to fan into flame the gift of God , which is in you through the laying on of my hands . 
For the Spirit God gave us does not make us timid , but gives us power , love and self-discipline . 
So do not be ashamed of the testimony about our Lord or of me his prisoner . Rather , join with me in suffering for the gospel , by the power of God .
He has saved us and called us to a holy life—not because of anything we have done but because of his own purpose and grace . This grace was given us in Christ Jesus before the beginning of time , 
but it has now been revealed through the appearing of our Savior , Christ Jesus , who has destroyed death and has brought life and immortality to light through the gospel . 
And of this gospel I was appointed a herald and an apostle and a teacher . 
That is why I am suffering as I am . Yet this is no cause for shame , because I know whom I have believed , and am convinced that he is able to guard what I have entrusted to him until that day .
What you heard from me , keep as the pattern of sound teaching , with faith and love in Christ Jesus . 
Guard the good deposit that was entrusted to you—guard it with the help of the Holy Spirit who lives in us .
You know that everyone in the province of Asia has deserted me , including Phygelus and Hermogenes .
May the Lord show mercy to the household of Onesiphorus , because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chains . 
On the contrary , when he was in Rome , he searched hard for me until he found me . 
May the Lord grant that he will find mercy from the Lord on that day ! You know very well in how many ways he helped me in Ephesus .
You then , my son , be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus . 
And the things you have heard me say in the presence of many witnesses entrust to reliable people who will also be qualified to teach others . 
Join with me in suffering , like a good soldier of Christ Jesus . 
No one serving as a soldier gets entangled in civilian affairs , but rather tries to please his commanding officer . 
Similarly , anyone who competes as an athlete does not receive the victor’s crown except by competing according to the rules . 
The hardworking farmer should be the first to receive a share of the crops .
Reflect on what I am saying , for the Lord will give you insight into all this .
Remember Jesus Christ , raised from the dead , descended from David . This is my gospel , 
for which I am suffering even to the point of being chained like a criminal . But God’s word is not chained . 
Therefore I endure everything for the sake of the elect , that they too may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus , with eternal glory .
Here is a trustworthy saying : If we died with him , we will also live with him ;
if we endure , we will also reign with him . If we disown him , he will also disown us ;
if we are faithless , he remains faithful , for he cannot disown himself .
Keep reminding God’s people of these things . Warn them before God against quarreling about words ; it is of no value , and only ruins those who listen . 
Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved , a worker who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly handles the word of truth .
Avoid godless chatter , because those who indulge in it will become more and more ungodly . 
Their teaching will spread like gangrene . Among them are Hymenaeus and Philetus ,
who have departed from the truth . They say that the resurrection has already taken place , and they destroy the faith of some . 
Nevertheless , God’s solid foundation stands firm , sealed with this inscription : “The Lord knows those who are his ,” and , “Everyone who confesses the name of the Lord must turn away from wickedness .”
In a large house there are articles not only of gold and silver , but also of wood and clay ; some are for special purposes and some for common use . 
Those who cleanse themselves from the latter will be instruments for special purposes , made holy , useful to the Master and prepared to do any good work .
Flee the evil desires of youth and pursue righteousness , faith , love and peace , along with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart . 
Don’t have anything to do with foolish and stupid arguments , because you know they produce quarrels . 
And the Lord’s servant must not be quarrelsome but must be kind to everyone , able to teach , not resentful . 
Opponents must be gently instructed , in the hope that God will grant them repentance leading them to a knowledge of the truth ,
and that they will come to their senses and escape from the trap of the devil , who has taken them captive to do his will .
But mark this : There will be terrible times in the last days . 
People will be lovers of themselves , lovers of money , boastful , proud , abusive , disobedient to their parents , ungrateful , unholy ,
without love , unforgiving , slanderous , without self-control , brutal , not lovers of the good , 
treacherous , rash , conceited , lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God— 
having a form of godliness but denying its power . Have nothing to do with such people .
They are the kind who worm their way into homes and gain control over gullible women , who are loaded down with sins and are swayed by all kinds of evil desires , 
always learning but never able to come to a knowledge of the truth . 
Just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses , so also these teachers oppose the truth . They are men of depraved minds , who , as far as the faith is concerned , are rejected . 
But they will not get very far because , as in the case of those men , their folly will be clear to everyone .
You , however , know all about my teaching , my way of life , my purpose , faith , patience , love , endurance , 
persecutions , sufferings—what kinds of things happened to me in Antioch , Iconium and Lystra , the persecutions I endured . Yet the Lord rescued me from all of them . 
In fact , everyone who wants to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted , 
while evildoers and impostors will go from bad to worse , deceiving and being deceived . 
But as for you , continue in what you have learned and have become convinced of , because you know those from whom you learned it , 
and how from infancy you have known the Holy Scriptures , which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus . 
All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for teaching , rebuking , correcting and training in righteousness ,
so that the servant of God may be thoroughly equipped for every good work .
In the presence of God and of Christ Jesus , who will judge the living and the dead , and in view of his appearing and his kingdom , I give you this charge : 
Preach the word ; be prepared in season and out of season ; correct , rebuke and encourage—with great patience and careful instruction .
For the time will come when people will not put up with sound doctrine . Instead , to suit their own desires , they will gather around them a great number of teachers to say what their itching ears want to hear .
They will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside to myths . 
But you , keep your head in all situations , endure hardship , do the work of an evangelist , discharge all the duties of your ministry .
For I am already being poured out like a drink offering , and the time for my departure is near . 
I have fought the good fight , I have finished the race , I have kept the faith . 
Now there is in store for me the crown of righteousness , which the Lord , the righteous Judge , will award to me on that day—and not only to me , but also to all who have longed for his appearing .
Do your best to come to me quickly ,
for Demas , because he loved this world , has deserted me and has gone to Thessalonica . Crescens has gone to Galatia , and Titus to Dalmatia . 
Only Luke is with me . Get Mark and bring him with you , because he is helpful to me in my ministry . 
I sent Tychicus to Ephesus .
When you come , bring the cloak that I left with Carpus at Troas , and my scrolls , especially the parchments .
Alexander the metalworker did me a great deal of harm . The Lord will repay him for what he has done . 
You too should be on your guard against him , because he strongly opposed our message .
At my first defense , no one came to my support , but everyone deserted me . May it not be held against them . 
But the Lord stood at my side and gave me strength , so that through me the message might be fully proclaimed and all the Gentiles might hear it . And I was delivered from the lion’s mouth . 
The Lord will rescue me from every evil attack and will bring me safely to his heavenly kingdom . To him be glory for ever and ever . Amen .
Greet Priscilla and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus . 
Erastus stayed in Corinth , and I left Trophimus sick in Miletus . 
Do your best to get here before winter . Eubulus greets you , and so do Pudens , Linus , Claudia and all the brothers and sisters .
The Lord be with your spirit . Grace be with you all .
Titus
Paul , a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ to further the faith of God’s elect and their knowledge of the truth that leads to godliness— 
in the hope of eternal life , which God , who does not lie , promised before the beginning of time , 
and which now at his appointed season he has brought to light through the preaching entrusted to me by the command of God our Savior ,
To Titus , my true son in our common faith : Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior .
The reason I left you in Crete was that you might put in order what was left unfinished and appoint elders in every town , as I directed you . 
An elder must be blameless , faithful to his wife , a man whose children believe and are not open to the charge of being wild and disobedient . 
Since an overseer manages God’s household , he must be blameless—not overbearing , not quick-tempered , not given to drunkenness , not violent , not pursuing dishonest gain . 
Rather , he must be hospitable , one who loves what is good , who is self-controlled , upright , holy and disciplined . 
He must hold firmly to the trustworthy message as it has been taught , so that he can encourage others by sound doctrine and refute those who oppose it .
For there are many rebellious people , full of meaningless talk and deception , especially those of the circumcision group . 
They must be silenced , because they are disrupting whole households by teaching things they ought not to teach—and that for the sake of dishonest gain . 
One of Crete’s own prophets has said it : “Cretans are always liars , evil brutes , lazy gluttons .”
This saying is true . Therefore rebuke them sharply , so that they will be sound in the faith 
and will pay no attention to Jewish myths or to the merely human commands of those who reject the truth . 
To the pure , all things are pure , but to those who are corrupted and do not believe , nothing is pure . In fact , both their minds and consciences are corrupted .
They claim to know God , but by their actions they deny him . They are detestable , disobedient and unfit for doing anything good .
You , however , must teach what is appropriate to sound doctrine . 
Teach the older men to be temperate , worthy of respect , self-controlled , and sound in faith , in love and in endurance .
Likewise , teach the older women to be reverent in the way they live , not to be slanderers or addicted to much wine , but to teach what is good .
Then they can urge the younger women to love their husbands and children ,
to be self-controlled and pure , to be busy at home , to be kind , and to be subject to their husbands , so that no one will malign the word of God .
Similarly , encourage the young men to be self-controlled . 
In everything set them an example by doing what is good . In your teaching show integrity , seriousness 
and soundness of speech that cannot be condemned , so that those who oppose you may be ashamed because they have nothing bad to say about us .
Teach slaves to be subject to their masters in everything , to try to please them , not to talk back to them ,
and not to steal from them , but to show that they can be fully trusted , so that in every way they will make the teaching about God our Savior attractive .
For the grace of God has appeared that offers salvation to all people . 
It teaches us to say “No” to ungodliness and worldly passions , and to live self-controlled , upright and godly lives in this present age , 
while we wait for the blessed hope—the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior , Jesus Christ ,
who gave himself for us to redeem us from all wickedness and to purify for himself a people that are his very own , eager to do what is good .
These , then , are the things you should teach . Encourage and rebuke with all authority . Do not let anyone despise you .
Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities , to be obedient , to be ready to do whatever is good ,
to slander no one , to be peaceable and considerate , and always to be gentle toward everyone .
At one time we too were foolish , disobedient , deceived and enslaved by all kinds of passions and pleasures . We lived in malice and envy , being hated and hating one another .
But when the kindness and love of God our Savior appeared ,
he saved us , not because of righteous things we had done , but because of his mercy . He saved us through the washing of rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit , 
whom he poured out on us generously through Jesus Christ our Savior , 
so that , having been justified by his grace , we might become heirs having the hope of eternal life .
This is a trustworthy saying . And I want you to stress these things , so that those who have trusted in God may be careful to devote themselves to doing what is good . These things are excellent and profitable for everyone .
But avoid foolish controversies and genealogies and arguments and quarrels about the law , because these are unprofitable and useless .
Warn a divisive person once , and then warn them a second time . After that , have nothing to do with them .
You may be sure that such people are warped and sinful ; they are self-condemned .
As soon as I send Artemas or Tychicus to you , do your best to come to me at Nicopolis , because I have decided to winter there . 
Do everything you can to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way and see that they have everything they need . 
Our people must learn to devote themselves to doing what is good , in order to provide for urgent needs and not live unproductive lives .
Everyone with me sends you greetings . Greet those who love us in the faith .
Grace be with you all .
Philemon 
Paul , a prisoner of Christ Jesus , and Timothy our brother , To Philemon our dear friend and fellow worker— 
also to Apphia our sister and Archippus our fellow soldier—and to the church that meets in your home :
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
I always thank my God as I remember you in my prayers , 
because I hear about your love for all his holy people and your faith in the Lord Jesus . 
I pray that your partnership with us in the faith may be effective in deepening your understanding of every good thing we share for the sake of Christ . 
Your love has given me great joy and encouragement , because you , brother , have refreshed the hearts of the Lord’s people .
Therefore , although in Christ I could be bold and order you to do what you ought to do , 
yet I prefer to appeal to you on the basis of love . It is as none other than Paul—an old man and now also a prisoner of Christ Jesus— 
that I appeal to you for my son Onesimus ,[b] who became my son while I was in chains .
Formerly he was useless to you , but now he has become useful both to you and to me .
I am sending him—who is my very heart—back to you . 
I would have liked to keep him with me so that he could take your place in helping me while I am in chains for the gospel . 
But I did not want to do anything without your consent , so that any favor you do would not seem forced but would be voluntary . 
Perhaps the reason he was separated from you for a little while was that you might have him back forever— 
no longer as a slave , but better than a slave , as a dear brother . He is very dear to me but even dearer to you , both as a fellow man and as a brother in the Lord .
So if you consider me a partner , welcome him as you would welcome me . 
If he has done you any wrong or owes you anything , charge it to me . 
I , Paul , am writing this with my own hand . I will pay it back—not to mention that you owe me your very self . 
I do wish , brother , that I may have some benefit from you in the Lord ; refresh my heart in Christ . 
Confident of your obedience , I write to you , knowing that you will do even more than I ask .
And one thing more : Prepare a guest room for me , because I hope to be restored to you in answer to your prayers .
Epaphras , my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus , sends you greetings .
And so do Mark , Aristarchus , Demas and Luke , my fellow workers .
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit .
Hebrews 
In the past God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many times and in various ways , 
but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son , whom he appointed heir of all things , and through whom also he made the universe . 
The Son is the radiance of God’s glory and the exact representation of his being , sustaining all things by his powerful word . After he had provided purification for sins , he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty in heaven . 
So he became as much superior to the angels as the name he has inherited is superior to theirs .
For to which of the angels did God ever say , “You are my Son ; today I have become your Father” ? Or again , “I will be his Father , and he will be my Son” ?
And again , when God brings his firstborn into the world , he says , “Let all God’s angels worship him .”
In speaking of the angels he says , “He makes his angels spirits , and his servants flames of fire .”
But about the Son he says , “Your throne , O God , will last for ever and ever ; a scepter of justice will be the scepter of your kingdom .
You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness ; therefore God , your God , has set you above your companions by anointing you with the oil of joy .”
He also says , “In the beginning , Lord , you laid the foundations of the earth , and the heavens are the work of your hands .
They will perish , but you remain ; they will all wear out like a garment .
You will roll them up like a robe ; like a garment they will be changed . But you remain the same , and your years will never end .”
To which of the angels did God ever say , “Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet” ?
Are not all angels ministering spirits sent to serve those who will inherit salvation ?
We must pay the most careful attention , therefore , to what we have heard , so that we do not drift away . 
For since the message spoken through angels was binding , and every violation and disobedience received its just punishment , 
how shall we escape if we ignore so great a salvation ? This salvation , which was first announced by the Lord , was confirmed to us by those who heard him . 
God also testified to it by signs , wonders and various miracles , and by gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed according to his will .
It is not to angels that he has subjected the world to come , about which we are speaking . 
But there is a place where someone has testified : “What is mankind that you are mindful of them , a son of man that you care for him ?
You made them a little lower than the angels ; you crowned them with glory and honor
and put everything under their feet .” In putting everything under them , God left nothing that is not subject to them . Yet at present we do not see everything subject to them .
But we do see Jesus , who was made lower than the angels for a little while , now crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death , so that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone .
In bringing many sons and daughters to glory , it was fitting that God , for whom and through whom everything exists , should make the pioneer of their salvation perfect through what he suffered . 
Both the one who makes people holy and those who are made holy are of the same family . So Jesus is not ashamed to call them brothers and sisters .
He says , “I will declare your name to my brothers and sisters ; in the assembly I will sing your praises .”
And again , “I will put my trust in him .” And again he says , “Here am I , and the children God has given me .”
Since the children have flesh and blood , he too shared in their humanity so that by his death he might break the power of him who holds the power of death—that is , the devil— 
and free those who all their lives were held in slavery by their fear of death . 
For surely it is not angels he helps , but Abraham’s descendants .
For this reason he had to be made like them , fully human in every way , in order that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God , and that he might make atonement for the sins of the people . 
Because he himself suffered when he was tempted , he is able to help those who are being tempted .
Therefore , holy brothers and sisters , who share in the heavenly calling , fix your thoughts on Jesus , whom we acknowledge as our apostle and high priest . 
He was faithful to the one who appointed him , just as Moses was faithful in all God’s house .
Jesus has been found worthy of greater honor than Moses , just as the builder of a house has greater honor than the house itself . 
For every house is built by someone , but God is the builder of everything . 
“Moses was faithful as a servant in all God’s house ,” bearing witness to what would be spoken by God in the future . 
But Christ is faithful as the Son over God’s house . And we are his house , if indeed we hold firmly to our confidence and the hope in which we glory .
So , as the Holy Spirit says : “Today , if you hear his voice ,
do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion , during the time of testing in the wilderness ,
where your ancestors tested and tried me , though for forty years they saw what I did .
That is why I was angry with that generation ; I said , ‘Their hearts are always going astray , and they have not known my ways .’
So I declared on oath in my anger , ‘They shall never enter my rest .’ ”
See to it , brothers and sisters , that none of you has a sinful , unbelieving heart that turns away from the living God .
But encourage one another daily , as long as it is called “Today ,” so that none of you may be hardened by sin’s deceitfulness . 
We have come to share in Christ , if indeed we hold our original conviction firmly to the very end . 
As has just been said : “Today , if you hear his voice , do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion .”
Who were they who heard and rebelled ? Were they not all those Moses led out of Egypt ? 
And with whom was he angry for forty years ? Was it not with those who sinned , whose bodies perished in the wilderness ? 
And to whom did God swear that they would never enter his rest if not to those who disobeyed ? 
So we see that they were not able to enter , because of their unbelief .
Therefore , since the promise of entering his rest still stands , let us be careful that none of you be found to have fallen short of it . 
For we also have had the good news proclaimed to us , just as they did ; but the message they heard was of no value to them , because they did not share the faith of those who obeyed .
Now we who have believed enter that rest , just as God has said , “So I declared on oath in my anger , ‘They shall never enter my rest .’”And yet his works have been finished since the creation of the world . 
For somewhere he has spoken about the seventh day in these words : “On the seventh day God rested from all his works .”
And again in the passage above he says , “They shall never enter my rest .”
Therefore since it still remains for some to enter that rest , and since those who formerly had the good news proclaimed to them did not go in because of their disobedience , 
God again set a certain day , calling it “Today .” This he did when a long time later he spoke through David , as in the passage already quoted : “Today , if you hear his voice , do not harden your hearts .”
For if Joshua had given them rest , God would not have spoken later about another day . 
There remains , then , a Sabbath-rest for the people of God ; 
for anyone who enters God’s rest also rests from their works , just as God did from his . 
Let us , therefore , make every effort to enter that rest , so that no one will perish by following their example of disobedience .
For the word of God is alive and active . Sharper than any double-edged sword , it penetrates even to dividing soul and spirit , joints and marrow ; it judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart . 
Nothing in all creation is hidden from God’s sight . Everything is uncovered and laid bare before the eyes of him to whom we must give account .
Therefore , since we have a great high priest who has ascended into heaven , Jesus the Son of God , let us hold firmly to the faith we profess . 
For we do not have a high priest who is unable to empathize with our weaknesses , but we have one who has been tempted in every way , just as we are—yet he did not sin . 
Let us then approach God’s throne of grace with confidence , so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need .
Every high priest is selected from among the people and is appointed to represent the people in matters related to God , to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins . 
He is able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and are going astray , since he himself is subject to weakness .
This is why he has to offer sacrifices for his own sins , as well as for the sins of the people .
And no one takes this honor on himself , but he receives it when called by God , just as Aaron was .
In the same way , Christ did not take on himself the glory of becoming a high priest . But God said to him , “You are my Son ; today I have become your Father .”
And he says in another place , “You are a priest forever , in the order of Melchizedek .”
During the days of Jesus’ life on earth , he offered up prayers and petitions with fervent cries and tears to the one who could save him from death , and he was heard because of his reverent submission . 
Son though he was , he learned obedience from what he suffered 
and , once made perfect , he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him 
and was designated by God to be high priest in the order of Melchizedek .
We have much to say about this , but it is hard to make it clear to you because you no longer try to understand . 
In fact , though by this time you ought to be teachers , you need someone to teach you the elementary truths of God’s word all over again . You need milk , not solid food ! 
Anyone who lives on milk , being still an infant , is not acquainted with the teaching about righteousness . 
But solid food is for the mature , who by constant use have trained themselves to distinguish good from evil .
Therefore let us move beyond the elementary teachings about Christ and be taken forward to maturity , not laying again the foundation of repentance from acts that lead to death , and of faith in God , 
instruction about cleansing rites , the laying on of hands , the resurrection of the dead , and eternal judgment . 
And God permitting , we will do so .
It is impossible for those who have once been enlightened , who have tasted the heavenly gift , who have shared in the Holy Spirit , 
who have tasted the goodness of the word of God and the powers of the coming age 
and who have fallen away , to be brought back to repentance . To their loss they are crucifying the Son of God all over again and subjecting him to public disgrace .
Land that drinks in the rain often falling on it and that produces a crop useful to those for whom it is farmed receives the blessing of God .
But land that produces thorns and thistles is worthless and is in danger of being cursed . In the end it will be burned .
Even though we speak like this , dear friends , we are convinced of better things in your case—the things that have to do with salvation . 
God is not unjust ; he will not forget your work and the love you have shown him as you have helped his people and continue to help them . 
We want each of you to show this same diligence to the very end , so that what you hope for may be fully realized . 
We do not want you to become lazy , but to imitate those who through faith and patience inherit what has been promised .
When God made his promise to Abraham , since there was no one greater for him to swear by , he swore by himself , 
saying , “I will surely bless you and give you many descendants .”
And so after waiting patiently , Abraham received what was promised .
People swear by someone greater than themselves , and the oath confirms what is said and puts an end to all argument . 
Because God wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear to the heirs of what was promised , he confirmed it with an oath . 
God did this so that , by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie , we who have fled to take hold of the hope set before us may be greatly encouraged . 
We have this hope as an anchor for the soul , firm and secure . It enters the inner sanctuary behind the curtain , 
where our forerunner , Jesus , has entered on our behalf . He has become a high priest forever , in the order of Melchizedek .

